
Fax
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
For other uses, see Fax (disambiguation).




A Samsung fax machine from the late 1990s


Fax (short for facsimile), sometimes called telecopying, is the telephonic transmission of scanned printed material (both text and images), normally to a telephone number connected to a printer or other output device. The original document is scanned with a fax machine (or a telecopier), which processes the contents (text or images) as a single fixed graphic image, converting it into a bitmap, and then transmitting it through the telephone system. The receiving fax machine reconverts the coded image, printing a paper copy.[1] Before digital technology became widespread, for many decades, the scanned data was transmitted as analog.
Although businesses usually maintain some kind of fax capability, the technology has faced increasing competition from Internet-based alternatives. Fax machines still retain some advantages, particularly in the transmission of sensitive material which, if sent over the Internet unencrypted, may be vulnerable to interception, without the need for telephone tapping. In some countries, because electronic signatures on contracts are not recognized by law while faxed contracts with copies of signatures are, fax machines enjoy continuing support in business.[2][citation needed]
In many corporate environments, standalone fax machines have been replaced by fax servers and other computerized systems capable of receiving and storing incoming faxes electronically, and then routing them to users on paper or via an email (which may be secured). Such systems have the advantage of reducing costs by eliminating unnecessary printouts and reducing the number of inbound analog phone lines needed by an office.
The once ubiquitous fax machine has also begun to disappear from the small office / home office environment too. Remotely hosted fax-server services are widely available from VoIP and e-mail providers allowing users to send and receive faxes using their existing e-mail accounts without the need for any hardware or dedicated fax lines. Personal computers have also long been able to handle incoming and outgoing faxes using analogue modems or ISDN, eliminating the need for a stand-alone fax machine. These solutions are often ideally suited for users who only very occasionally need to use fax services.




Contents


1 History

1.1 Wire transmission
1.2 Wireless transmission
1.3 Telephone transmission
1.4 Computer facsimile interface


2 Capabilities

2.1 Group

2.1.1 Analog
2.1.2 Digital


2.2 Class
2.3 Data transmission rate
2.4 Compression

2.4.1 Modified Huffman
2.4.2 Modified read
2.4.3 Modified Modified Read
2.4.4 Matsushita Whiteline Skip


2.5 Typical characteristics
2.6 Stroke speed
2.7 Fax paper


3 Internet fax
4 See also
5 References
6 External links




[edit] History
[edit] Wire transmission
Scottish inventor Alexander Bain worked on chemical mechanical fax type devices and in 1846 was able to reproduce graphic signs in laboratory experiments. He received the first fax patent in 1843. Frederick Bakewell made several improvements on Bain's design and demonstrated a telefax machine. The Pantelegraph was invented by the Italian physicist Giovanni Caselli. He introduced the first commercial telefax service between Paris and Lyon in 1865, some 11 years before the invention of telephones.[3][4]
In 1881, English inventor Shelford Bidwell constructed the scanning phototelegraph that was the first telefax machine to scan any two-dimensional original, not requiring manual plotting or drawing. Around 1900, German physicist Arthur Korn invented the Bildtelegraph, widespread in continental Europe especially, since a widely noticed transmission of a wanted-person photograph from Paris to London in 1908, used until the wider distribution of the radiofax. Its main competitors were the Blinographe by douard Belin first, then since the 1930s the Hellschreiber, invented in 1929 by German inventor Rudolf Hell, a pioneer in mechanical image scanning and transmission.
The 1888 invention of the telautograph by Elisha Grey marked a further development in fax technology, allowing users to send signatures over long distances, thus allowing the verification of identification or ownership over long distances.[5]
[edit] Wireless transmission
Main article: Radiofax
As a designer for the Radio Corporation of America (RCA), in 1924, Richard H. Ranger invented the wireless photoradiogram, or transoceanic radio facsimile, the forerunner of todays "fax" machines. A photograph of President Calvin Coolidge sent from New York to London on November 29, 1924 became the first photo picture reproduced by transoceanic radio facsimile. Commercial use of Rangers product began two years later. Radio fax is still in common use today for transmitting weather charts and information to ships at sea. Also in 1924, Herbert E. Ives of AT&T Corporation transmitted and reconstructed the first color facsimile, using color separations. Around 1952 or so, Finch Facsimile, a highly-developed machine, was described in detail in a book; it apparently was never manufactured in quantity.
In the 1960s, the United States Army transmitted the first photograph via satellite facsimile ("fax") to Puerto Rico from the Deal Test Site using the Courier satellite.
[edit] Telephone transmission
A landmark year was 1964, in which the Xerox Corporation introduced (and patented) what many consider to be the first commercialized version of the modern fax machine, under the name (LDX) or Long Distance Xerography. This model was superseded two years later with a unit that would truly set the standard for fax machines for years to come. Up until this point facsimile machines were very expensive and hard to operate. In 1966, Xerox released the Magnafax Telecopier, a smaller, 46-pound facsimile machine. This unit was far easier to operate and could be connected to any standard telephone line. This machine was capable of transmitting a letter-sized document in about six minutes. The first sub-minute, digital fax machine was developed by Dacom, which built on digital data compression technology originally developed at Lockheed for satellite communication.[6][7]
By the late 1970s, many companies around the world (but especially Japan), entered the fax market. Very shortly after a new wave of more compact, faster and efficient fax machines would hit the market. Xerox continued to refine the fax machine for years after their ground-breaking first machine. But, in later years it would be combined with Copier equipment to create the hybrid machines we have today that copy, scan and fax. Some of the lesser known capabilities of the Xerox fax technologies included their Ethernet enabled Fax Services on their 8000 workstations in the early 1980s.
Prior to the introduction of the ubiquitous fax machine, one of the first being the Exxon Qwip[8] in the mid-1970s, facsimile machines worked by optical scanning of a document or drawing spinning on a drum. The reflected light, varying in intensity according to the light and dark areas of the document, was focused on a photocell so that the current in a circuit varied with the amount of light. This current was used to control a tone generator (a modulator), the current determining the frequency of the tone produced. This audio tone was then transmitted using an acoustic coupler (a speaker, in this case) attached to the microphone of a common telephone handset. At the receiving end, a handsets speaker was attached to an acoustic coupler (a microphone), and a demodulator converted the varying tone into a variable current that controlled the mechanical movement of a pen or pencil to reproduce the image on a blank sheet of paper on an identical drum rotating at the same rate. A pair of these expensive and bulky machines could only be afforded by companies with a serious need to communicate drawings, design sketches or signed documents between distant locations, such as an office and factory.[9] Western Union began a "Faxcimile Telegraphy" service in 1935. Their first coast-to-coast message contained images of Mickey Mouse.
[edit] Computer facsimile interface
In 1985, Dr. Ayaz Asmat, founder of GammaLink, produced the first computer fax board, called GammaFax.
[edit] Capabilities
There are several indicators of fax capabilities: Group, class, data transmission rate, and conformance with ITU-T (formerly CCITT) recommendations.
Fax machines utilize standard PSTN lines and telephone numbers.
[edit] Group
[edit] Analog
Group 1 and 2 faxes are sent in the same manner as a frame of analog television, with each scanned line transmitted as a continuous analog signal. Horizontal resolution depended upon the quality of the scanner, transmission line, and the printer. Analog fax machines are obsolete and no longer manufactured. ITU-T Recommendations T.2 and T.3 were withdrawn as obsolete in July 1996.

Group 1 faxes conform to the ITU-T Recommendation T.2. Group 1 faxes take six minutes to transmit a single page, with a vertical resolution of 96 scan lines per inch. Group 1 fax machines are obsolete and no longer manufactured.
Group 2 faxes conform to the ITU-T Recommendations T.30 and T.3. Group 2 faxes take three minutes to transmit a single page, with a vertical resolution of 96 scan lines per inch. Group 2 fax machines are almost obsolete, and are no longer manufactured. Group 2 fax machines can interoperate with Group 3 fax machines.

[edit] Digital




The Dacom DFC-10 - the first digital fax machine.[6]






The chip in a fax machine. Only about one quarter of the length is shown. The thin line in the middle consists of photosensitive pixels. The read-out circuit is at left.


A major breakthrough in the development of the modern facsimile system was the result of digital technology. Where the analog signal from scanners was digitized and then compressed, resulting in the ability to transmit high rates of data across standard phone lines. The first digital fax machine was the Dacom Rapidfax first sold in late 1960s, which incorporated digital data compression technology developed by Lockheed for transmission of images from satellites.[6][7]
Group 3 and 4 faxes are digital formats, and take advantage of digital compression methods to greatly reduce transmission times.

Group 3 faxes conform to the ITU-T Recommendations T.30 and T.4. Group 3 faxes take between six and fifteen seconds to transmit a single page (not including the initial time for the fax machines to handshake and synchronize). The horizontal and vertical resolutions are allowed by the T.4 standard to vary among a set of fixed resolutions:

Horizontal: 100 scan lines per inch

Vertical: 100 scan lines per inch ('Basic')


Horizontal: 200 or 204 scan lines per inch

Vertical: 100 or 98 scan lines per inch ('Standard')
Vertical: 200 or 196 scan lines per inch ('Fine')
Vertical: 400 or 391 (note not 392) scan lines per inch ('Superfine')


Horizontal: 300 scan lines per inch

Vertical: 300 scan lines per inch


Horizontal: 400 or 408 scan lines per inch

Vertical: 400 or 391 scan lines per inch ('Ultrafine')




Group 4 faxes conform to the ITU-T Recommendations T.563, T.503, T.521, T.6, T.62, T.70, T.72, T.411 to T.417. They are designed to operate over 64 kbit/s digital ISDN circuits. Their resolution is determined by the T.6 recommendation, which is a superset of the T.4 recommendation.

Fax Over IP (FoIP) can transmit and receive pre-digitized documents at near realtime speeds using ITU-T recommendation T.38 to send digitised images over an IP network using JPEG compression. T.38 is designed to work with VoIP services and often supported by analog telephone adapters used by legacy fax machines that need to connect through a VoIP service. Scanned documents are limited to the amount of time the user takes to load the document in a scanner and for the device to process a digital file. The resolution can vary from as little as 150 DPI to 9600 DPI or more. This type of faxing is not related to the e-mail to fax service that still uses fax modems at least one way.
[edit] Class
Computer modems are often designated by a particular fax class, which indicates how much processing is offloaded from the computer's CPU to the fax modem.

Class 1 fax devices do fax data transfer where the T.4/T.6 data compression and T.30 session management are performed by software on a controlling computer. This is described in ITU-T recommendation T.31.[10]
Class 2 fax devices perform T.30 session management themselves, but the T.4/T.6 data compression is performed by software on a controlling computer. The relevant ITU-T recommendation is T.32.[10]
Class 2.0 is different from Class 2.
Class 2.1 is an improvement of Class 2.0. Class 2.1 fax devices are referred to as "super G3"; they seem to be a little faster than Class 1/2/2.0.
Class 3 fax devices are responsible for virtually the entire fax session, given little more than a phone number and the text to send (including rendering ASCII text as a raster image). These devices are not common.

[edit] Data transmission rate
Several different telephone line modulation techniques are used by fax machines. They are negotiated during the fax-modem handshake, and the fax devices will use the highest data rate that both fax devices support, usually a minimum of 14.4 kbit/s for Group 3 fax.




ITU Standard
Released Date
Data Rates (bit/s)
Modulation Method


V.27
1988
4800, 2400
PSK


V.29
1988
9600, 7200, 4800
QAM


V.17
1991
14400, 12000, 9600, 7200
TCM


V.34
1994
28800
QAM


V.34bis
1998
33600
QAM




Note that 'Super Group 3' faxes use V.34bis modulation that allows a data rate of up to 33.6 kbit/s.
[edit] Compression
As well as specifying the resolution (and allowable physical size of the image being faxed), the ITU-T T.4 recommendation specifies two compression methods for decreasing the amount of data that needs to be transmitted between the fax machines to transfer the image. The two methods are:

Modified Huffman (MH), and
Modified read (MR)

[edit] Modified Huffman
Modified Huffman (MH) is a codebook-based run-length encoding scheme optimised to efficiently compress whitespace. As most faxes consist mostly of white space, this minimises the transmission time of most faxes. Each line scanned is compressed independently of its predecessor and successor.
[edit] Modified read
Modified read (MR) encodes the first scanned line using MH. The next line is compared to the first, the differences determined, and then the differences are encoded and transmitted. This is effective as most lines differ little from their predecessor. This is not continued to the end of the fax transmission, but only for a limited number of lines until the process is reset and a new 'first line' encoded with MH is produced. This limited number of lines is to prevent errors propagating throughout the whole fax, as the standard does not provide for error-correction. MR is an optional facility, and some fax machines do not use MR in order to minimise the amount of computation required by the machine. The limited number of lines is two for 'Standard' resolution faxes, and four for 'Fine' resolution faxes.
[edit] Modified Modified Read
The ITU-T T.6 recommendation adds a further compression type of Modified Modified READ (MMR), which simply allows for a greater number of lines to be coded by MR than in T.4. This is because T.6 makes the assumption that the transmission is over a circuit with a low number of line errors such as digital ISDN. In this case, there is no maximum number of lines for which the differences are encoded.
[edit] Matsushita Whiteline Skip
A proprietary compression scheme employed on Panasonic fax machines is Matsushita Whiteline Skip (MWS). It can be overlaid on the other compression schemes, but is operative only when two Panasonic machines are communicating with one another. This system detects the blank scanned areas between lines of text, and then compresses several blank scan lines into the data space of a single character.
[edit] Typical characteristics
Group 3 fax machines transfer one or a few printed or handwritten pages per minute in black-and-white (bitonal) at a resolution of 20498 (normal) or 204196 (fine) dots per square inch. The transfer rate is 14.4kbit/s or higher for modems and some fax machines, but fax machines support speeds beginning with 2400 bit/s and typically operate at 9600 bit/s. The transferred image formats are called ITU-T (formerly CCITT) fax group 3 or 4.
The most basic fax mode transfers black and white colors only. The original page is scanned in a resolution of 1728 pixels/line and 1145 lines/page (for A4). The resulting raw data is compressed using a modified Huffman code optimized for written text, achieving average compression factors of around 20. Typically a page needs 10s for transmission, instead of about 3 minutes for the same uncompressed raw data of 17281145 bits at a speed of 9600bit/s. The compression method uses a Huffman codebook for run lengths of black and white runs in a single scanned line, and it can also use the fact that two adjacent scanlines are usually quite similar, saving bandwidth by encoding only the differences.
Fax classes denote the way fax programs interact with fax hardware. Available classes include Class 1, Class 2, Class 2.0 and 2.1, and Intel CAS. Many modems support at least class 1 and often either Class 2 or Class 2.0. Which is preferable to use depends on factors such as hardware, software, modem firmware, and expected use.
Fax machines from the 1970s to the 1990s often used direct thermal printers as their printing technology, but since the mid-1990s there has been a transition towards thermal transfer printers, inkjet printers and laser printers.
One of the advantages of inkjet printing is that inkjets can affordably print in color; therefore, many of the inkjet-based fax machines claim to have color fax capability. There is a standard called ITU-T30e (formally ITU-T Recommendation T.30 Annex E [1]) for faxing in color; unfortunately, it is not widely supported, so many of the color fax machines can only fax in color to machines from the same manufacturer.
[edit] Stroke speed
Stroke speed in facsimile systems is the rate at which a fixed line perpendicular to the direction of scanning is crossed in one direction by a scanning or recording spot. Stroke speed is usually expressed as a number of strokes per minute. When the fax system scans in both directions, the stroke speed is twice this number. In most conventional 20th century mechanical systems, the stroke speed is equivalent to drum speed.[11]
[edit] Fax paper




Paper roll for thermal transfer printer fax machine


As a precaution, thermal fax paper is typically not accepted in archives or as documentary evidence in some courts of law unless photocopied. This is because the image-forming coating is eradicable and brittle, and it tends to detach from the medium after a long time in storage.[12]
[edit] Internet fax
See also: Internet fax
One popular alternative is to subscribe to an internet fax service, allowing users to send and receive faxes from their personal computers using an existing email account. No software, fax server or fax machine is needed. Faxes are received as attached TIFF or PDF files, or in proprietary formats that require the use of the service provider's software. Faxes can be sent or retrieved from anywhere at any time that a user can get internet access. Some services offer secure faxing to comply with stringent HIPAA and GrammLeachBliley Act requirements to keep medical information and financial information private and secure. Utilizing a fax service provider does not require paper, a dedicated fax line, or consumable resources.
Another alternative to a physical fax machine is to make use of computer software which allows people to send and receive faxes using their own computers, utilizing fax servers and unified messaging. A virtual (email) fax can be printed out and then signed and scanned back to computer before being emailed. Also the sender can attach a digital signature to the document file.
[edit] See also




Telecommunications  portal





3D Fax
Black fax
Called subscriber identification (CSID)
Error correction mode (ECM)
Fax art
Fax demodulator
Fax modem
Fax server
Faxlore
Junk fax
Fultograph
Internet fax
Radiofax image transmission over HF radio
Slow-scan television
T.38 Fax-over-IP
Telautograph
Transmitting Subscriber Identification (TSID)





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Fax machines


[edit] References


^ Rouse, Margaret (June 2006). "What is fax?". SearchNetworking. http://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/definition/fax. Retrieved 25 July 2012.
^ Adams, Ken (7 November 2007). "Enforceability of Fax and Scanned Signature Pages". AdamsDrafting. http://www.adamsdrafting.com/2007/11/07/fax-and-scanned-signatures/. Retrieved 25 July 2012.
^ Istituto Tecnico Industriale, Rome, Italy. Italian biography of Giovanni Caselli
^ The Hebrew University of Jerusalem - Giovanni Caselli biography
^ "The History of Fax  from 1843 to Present Day". Fax Authority. http://faxauthority.com/fax-history/. Retrieved 25 July 2012.
^ a b c The implementation of a personal computer-based digital facsimile information distribution system by Chung, Edward C.
^ a b Fax: The Principles and Practice of Facsimile Communication, Daniel M. Costigan, Chilton Book Company, 1971, pages 112114, 213, 239
^ New York Times. An Exxon Sale To Harris Unit, New York Times, February 22, 1985.
^ McCarroll, Thomas. Just The Fax, Ma'am, Time Magazine, New York, August 31, 1987.
^ a b Peterson, Kerstin Day (2000). Business telecom systems: a guide to choosing the best technologies and services. Focal Press. pp.191192. ISBN1578200415. http://books.google.com/books?id=W79R0niNU5wC&pg=PA191. Retrieved 2011-04-02.
^ This article incorporatespublic domain material from the General Services Administration document "Federal Standard 1037C" (in support of MIL-STD-188).
^ "4.12 Filing rules: 19.Newspaper extracts or thermal facsimile paper should not be preserved as archives. Such extracts should be photocopied and the copy preserved. The original can then be destroyed." Office of Corporate & Legal Affairs, University College Cork, Ireland


[edit] External links



Look up faxor facsimile in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Look up facsimile in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



ITU T.30 Recommendation
The historical evolution of Fax, at technikum29, museum of calculator, computer and communication technology
Group 3 Facsimile Communication a '97 essay with technical details on compression and error codes, and call establishment and release.









v
t
e


URI scheme






Official



aaa
aaas
about
acap
cap
cid
crid
data
dav
dict
dns
fax
file
ftp
geo
go
gopher
h323
http
https
iax
im
imap
info
ldap
mailto
mid
news
nfs
nntp
pop
rsync
pres
rtsp
sip
sips
snmp
tag
tel
telnet
tftp
urn
view-source
wais
ws
wss
xmpp








Unofficial



afp
aim
apt
bolo
bzr
callto
coffee
cvs
daap
dsnp
ed2k
feed
fish
gg
git
gizmoproject
irc
ircs
itms
javascript
ldaps
magnet
mms
msnim
postal2
secondlife
skype
spotify
ssh
svn
sftp
smb
sms
steam
webcal
winamp
wyciwyg
xfire
ymsgr









Protocol list














v
t
e


Telecommunications






History



Beacons
Broadcasting
Communications satellites
Computer networks
Drums
Electrical telegraphs
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraphs
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phones
Optical telegraphy
Photophones
Radio
Radiotelephones
Smoke signals
Telegraphy
Telephones
The Telephone Cases
Television
Undersea telegraph lines
Videotelephony











Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Lee De Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Guglielmo Marconi
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Papin Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin








Transmission media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Telephone lines
Terrestrial microwave








Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Packet switched
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








Geographic







v
t
e


Telecommunications in Africa






Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Cte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
So Tom and Prncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe








States with limited
recognition



Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland








Dependencies and
other territories



Canary Islands/ Ceuta/ Melilla/ Plazas de soberana(Spain)
Madeira(Portugal)
Mayotte/ Runion(France)
Saint Helena/ Ascension Island/ Tristan da Cunha(United Kingdom)
Western Sahara










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Asia






Sovereign
states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
People's Republic of China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan








Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Europe






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria








Dependencies and
other territories



land
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard








Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Telecommunications in North America






Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States








Dependencies and
other territories



Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Navassa Island
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthlemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Oceania






Sovereign states



Australia
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu








Dependencies and
other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cook Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Niue
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Telecommunications in South America






Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela








Dependencies and
other territories



Aruba
Bonaire
Curaao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands











 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 19431/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 57964/1500000
Post-expand include size: 257321/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 163629/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/40
Expensive parser function count: 15/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:10826-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20121224202053 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fax&oldid=527006661"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: FaxTelecommunications equipmentITU-T recommendationsOffice equipmentComputer peripheralsScottish inventionsItalian inventionsEnglish inventionsGerman inventionsAmerican inventionsJapanese inventions1843 introductionsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Federal Standard 1037CWikipedia articles incorporating text from MIL-STD-188All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2010  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 