
Fluid
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 
(Redirected from Fluids)
 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
This article is about the concept in physics.  For other uses, see Fluid (disambiguation).





This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2009) 




Continuum mechanics







Laws


Conservation of mass
Conservation of momentum
Conservation of energy
Entropy inequality








Solid mechanics


Solids
Stress
Deformation
Compatibility
Finite strain
Infinitesimal strain
Elasticity

linear


Plasticity
Bending
Hooke's law
Failure theory
Fracture mechanics
Contact mechanics

Frictionless
Frictional










Fluid mechanics


Fluids
Fluid statics
Fluid dynamics
NavierStokes equations
Bernoulli's principle
Buoyancy
Viscosity

Newtonian
Non-Newtonian


Archimedes' principle
Pascal's law
Pressure
Liquids
Surface tension
Capillary action
Gases
Atmosphere
Boyle's law
Charles's law
Gay-Lussac's law
Combined gas law
Plasma








Rheology


Viscoelasticity
Smart fluids

Magnetorheological
Electrorheological
Ferrofluids


Rheometry
Rheometer








Scientists


Bernoulli
Boyle
Cauchy
Charles
Euler
Gay-Lussac
Hooke
Pascal
Newton
Navier
Stokes









v
t
e





In physics, a fluid is a substance that continually deforms (flows) under an applied shear stress. Fluids are a subset of the phases of matter and include liquids, gases, plasmas and, to some extent, plastic solids.
Although the term "fluid" includes both the liquid and gas phases, in common usage, "fluid" is often used as a synonym for "liquid", with no implication that gas could also be present. For example, "brake fluid" is hydraulic oil and will not perform its required function if there is gas in it. This colloquial usage of the term is also common in medicine and in nutrition ("take plenty of fluids").
Liquids form a free surface (that is, a surface not created by the container) while gases do not. The distinction between solids and fluid is not entirely obvious. The distinction is made by evaluating the viscosity of the substance. Silly Putty can be considered to behave like a solid or a fluid, depending on the time period over which it is observed. It is best described as a viscoelastic fluid. There are many examples of substances proving difficult to classify. A particularly interesting one is pitch, as demonstrated in the pitch drop experiment currently running at the University of Queensland.




Contents


1 Physics

1.1 Modelling


2 See also
3 References




[edit] Physics
Fluids display properties such as:

not resisting deformation, or resisting it only lightly (viscosity), and
the ability to flow (also described as the ability to take on the shape of the container).This also means that all fluids have the property of fluidity.

These properties are typically a function of their inability to support a shear stress in static equilibrium.
Solids can be subjected to shear stresses, and to normal stressesboth compressive and tensile. In contrast, ideal fluids can only be subjected to normal, compressive stress which is called pressure. Real fluids display viscosity and so are capable of being subjected to low levels of shear stress.
[edit] Modelling
Main article: Fluid mechanics
In a solid, shear stress is a function of strain, but in a fluid, shear stress is a function of strain rate. A consequence of this behavior is Pascal's law which describes the role of pressure in characterizing a fluid's state.
Depending on the relationship between shear stress, and the rate of strain and its derivatives, fluids can be characterized as one of the following:

Newtonian fluids: where stress is directly proportional to rate of strain


Non-Newtonian fluids: where stress is not proportional to rate of strain, its higher powers and derivatives.

The behavior of fluids can be described by the NavierStokes equationsa set of partial differential equations which are based on:

continuity (conservation of mass),
conservation of linear momentum,
conservation of angular momentum,
conservation of energy.

The study of fluids is fluid mechanics, which is subdivided into fluid dynamics and fluid statics depending on whether the fluid is in motion.
[edit] See also

Matter
Liquid
Gas

[edit] References

Bird, Byron; Stewart, Warren & Lightfoot, Edward (2007). Transport Phenomena. New York: Wiley, Second Edition. pp.912. ISBN0-471-41077-2.

 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 2225/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 35802/1500000
Post-expand include size: 35990/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 17885/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/40
Expensive parser function count: 1/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:10915-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20121229081530 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fluid&oldid=526362549"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Fluid dynamicsHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from April 2009All articles lacking sources  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 