
Fluid statics
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 
(Redirected from Hydrostatics)
 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009) 




Continuum mechanics







Laws


Conservation of mass
Conservation of momentum
Conservation of energy
Entropy inequality








Solid mechanics


Solids
Stress
Deformation
Compatibility
Finite strain
Infinitesimal strain
Elasticity

linear


Plasticity
Bending
Hooke's law
Failure theory
Fracture mechanics
Contact mechanics

Frictionless
Frictional










Fluid mechanics


Fluids
Fluid statics
Fluid dynamics
NavierStokes equations
Bernoulli's principle
Buoyancy
Viscosity

Newtonian
Non-Newtonian


Archimedes' principle
Pascal's law
Pressure
Liquids
Surface tension
Capillary action
Gases
Atmosphere
Boyle's law
Charles's law
Gay-Lussac's law
Combined gas law
Plasma








Rheology


Viscoelasticity
Smart fluids

Magnetorheological
Electrorheological
Ferrofluids


Rheometry
Rheometer








Scientists


Bernoulli
Boyle
Cauchy
Charles
Euler
Gay-Lussac
Hooke
Pascal
Newton
Navier
Stokes









v
t
e








Look up hydrostatics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.






Table of Hydraulics and Hydrostatics, from the 1728 Cyclopaedia


Fluid statics (also called hydrostatics) is the science of fluids at rest, and is a sub-field within fluid mechanics. The term usually refers to the mathematical treatment of the subject. It embraces the study of the conditions under which fluids are at rest in stable equilibrium. The use of fluid to do work is called hydraulics, and the science of fluids in motion is fluid dynamics.




Contents


1 Pressure in fluids at rest

1.1 Hydrostatic pressure
1.2 Atmospheric pressure
1.3 Buoyancy
1.4 Hydrostatic force on submerged surfaces


2 Liquids (fluids with free surfaces)

2.1 Capillary action
2.2 Drops


3 See also
4 References




[edit] Pressure in fluids at rest
Due to the fundamental nature of fluids, a fluid cannot remain at rest under the presence of a shear stress. However, fluids can exert pressure normal to any contacting surface. If a point in the fluid is thought of as an infinitesimally small cube, then it follows from the principles of equilibrium that the pressure on every side of this unit of fluid must be equal. If this were not the case, the fluid would move in the direction of the resulting force. Thus, the pressure on a fluid at rest is isotropic; i.e., it acts with equal magnitude in all directions. This characteristic allows fluids to transmit force through the length of pipes or tubes; i.e., a force applied to a fluid in a pipe is transmitted, via the fluid, to the other end of the pipe.
This concept was first formulated, in a slightly extended form, by the French mathematician and philosopher Blaise Pascal in 1647 and would later be known as Pascal's law. This law has many important applications in hydraulics.
[edit] Hydrostatic pressure
See also: Vertical pressure variation
Hydrostatic pressure is the pressure exerted by a fluid at equilibrium due to the force of gravity.[1] A fluid in this condition is known as a hydrostatic fluid. The hydrostatic pressure can be determined from a control volume analysis of an infinitesimally small cube of fluid. Since pressure is defined as the force exerted on a test area (p = F/A, with p: pressure, F: force normal to area A, A: area), and the only force acting on any such small cube of fluid is the weight of the fluid column above it, hydrostatic pressure can be calculated according to the following formula:

,

where:

p is the hydrostatic pressure (Pa),
 is the fluid density (kg/m3),
g is gravitational acceleration (m/s2),
A is the test area (m2),
z is the height (parallel to the direction of gravity) of the test area (m),
z0 is the height of the zero reference point of the pressure (m).

For water and other liquids, this integral can be simplified significantly for many practical applications, based on the following two assumptions: Since many liquids can be considered incompressible, a reasonably good estimation can be made from assuming a constant density throughout the liquid. (The same assumption cannot be made within a gaseous environment.) Also, since the height h of the fluid column between z and z0 is often reasonably small compared to the radius of the Earth, one can neglect the variation of g. Under these circumstances, the integral boils down to the simple formula:



where h is the height zz0 of the liquid column between the test volume and the zero reference point of the pressure. Note that this reference point should lie at or below the surface of the liquid. Otherwise, one has to split the integral into two (or more) terms with the constant liquid and (z')above. For example, the absolute pressure compared to vacuum is:



where H is the total height of the liquid column above the test area the surface, and patm is the atmospheric pressure, i.e., the pressure calculated from the remaining integral over the air column from the liquid surface to infinity.
Hydrostatic pressure has been used in the preservation of foods in a process called pascalization.[2]
In medicine, hydrostatic pressure in blood vessels is the pressure of the blood against the wall. It is the opposing force to oncotic pressure.
[edit] Atmospheric pressure
Statistical mechanics shows that, for a gas of constant temperature, T, its pressure, p will vary with height, h, as:



where:

g is the acceleration due to gravity
T is the absolute temperature
k is Boltzmann constant
M is the mass of a single molecule of gas
p is the pressure
h is the height

This is known as the barometric formula, and may be derived from assuming the pressure is hydrostatic.
If there are multiple types of molecules in the gas, the partial pressure of each type will be given by this equation. Under most conditions, the distribution of each species of gas is independent of the other species.
[edit] Buoyancy
Main article: Buoyancy
Any body of arbitrary shape which is immersed, partly or fully, in a fluid will experience the action of a net force in the opposite direction of the local pressure gradient. If this pressure gradient arises from gravity, the net force is in the vertical direction opposite that of the gravitational force. This vertical force is termed buoyancy or buoyant force and is equal in magnitude, but opposite in direction, to the weight of the displaced fluid. Mathematically,



where  is the density of the fluid, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and V is the volume of fluid directly above the curved surface.[3] In the case of a ship, for instance, its weight is balanced by shear force from the displaced water, allowing it to float. If more cargo is loaded onto the ship, it would sink more into the water - displacing more water and thus receive a higher buoyant force to balance the increased weight.
Discovery of the principle of buoyancy is attributed to Archimedes.
[edit] Hydrostatic force on submerged surfaces
The horizontal and vertical components of the hydrostatic force acting on a submerged surface are given by the following:[3]




where:

pc is the pressure at the center of the vertical projection of the submerged surface
A is the area of the same vertical projection of the surface
 is the density of the fluid
g is the acceleration due to gravity
V is the volume of fluid directly above the curved surface

[edit] Liquids (fluids with free surfaces)
Liquids can have free surfaces at which they interface with gases, or with a vacuum. In general, the lack of the ability to sustain a shear stress entails that free surfaces rapidly adjust towards an equilibrium. However, on small length scales, there is an important balancing force from surface tension.
[edit] Capillary action
When liquids are constrained in vessels whose dimensions are small, compared to the relevant length scales, surface tension effects become important leading to the formation of a meniscus through capillary action. This capillary action has profound consequences for biological systems as it is part of one of the two driving mechanisms of the flow of water in plant xylem, the transpirational pull.
[edit] Drops
Without surface tension, drops would not be able to form. The dimensions and stability of drops are determined by surface tension.The drop's surface tension is directly proportional to the cohesion property of the fluid.
[edit] See also




Underwater diving  portal




Communicating vessels
Hydrostatic test

[edit] References


^ http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/hydrostatic+pressure
^ Brown, Amy Christian (2007). Understanding Food: Principles and Preparation (3 ed.). Cengage Learning. p.546. ISBN978-0-495-10745-3. http://books.google.com/books?id=edPzm5KSMmYC&printsec=frontcover&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false.
^ a b Fox, Robert; McDonald, Alan; Pritchard, Philip (2012). Fluid Mechanics (8 ed.). John Wiley & Sons. pp.7683. ISBN978-1-118-02641-0.










v
t
e


Branches of physics






Divisions



Applied physics
Experimental physics
Theoretical physics








Energy and motion



Classical mechanics

Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics


Continuum mechanics
Celestial mechanics
Statistical mechanics
Thermodynamics
Fluid mechanics
Quantum mechanics








Waves and fields



Gravitation
Electromagnetism
Quantum field theory
Relativity

Special relativity
General relativity











Physical sciences
and mathematics




Accelerator physics
Acoustics
Astrophysics

Heliophysics
Nuclear astrophysics
Solar physics
Space physics
Stellar physics


Atomic, molecular, and optical physics
Chemical physics
Computational physics
Condensed matter physics

Solid-state physics


Digital physics
Material physics
Mathematical physics
Nuclear physics
Optics

Nonlinear optics
Quantum optics


Particle physics

Astroparticle physics
Phenomenology


Plasma
Polymer physics
Statistical physics









Physics and biology/
geology/ economics




Biophysics

Biomechanics
Medical physics
Neurophysics


Agrophysics

Soil physics


Atmospheric physics
Econophysics
Geophysics
Psychophysics
















v
t
e


Diving medicine, physiology, physics and environment






Diving medicine:





Injuries
and
Disorders






Pressure









Oxygen




Deep water blackout
Hyperoxia
Oxygen toxicity
Shallow water blackout









Inert gases




Atrial septal defect
Avascular necrosis
Decompression sickness
Dysbaric osteonecrosis
High-pressure nervous syndrome
Hydrogen narcosis
Isobaric counterdiffusion
Nitrogen narcosis
Taravana
Uncontrolled decompression









Carbon dioxide




Hypercapnia







Aerosinusitis
Air embolism
Alternobaric vertigo
Barodontalgia
Barostriction
Barotrauma
Decompression illness
Dental barotrauma
Dysbarism
Ear clearing
Frenzel maneuver
Valsalva maneuver









Immersion




Asphyxia
Drowning
Hypothermia
Hypoxia (medical)
Immersion diuresis
Instinctive drowning response
Salt water aspiration syndrome
Swimming-induced pulmonary edema







List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders
Seasickness
Cramps









Treatments




Diving medicine
Hyperbaric medicine
In-water recompression
Oxygen therapy
Diving chamber














Diving physiology



Bloodair barrier
CO retention
Cold shock response
Blood shift
Decompression (diving)
Gas exchange
Lipid
Mammalian diving reflex
Metabolism
Normocapnia
Oxygen window in technical diving
Perfusion
Pulmonary circulation
Respiratory exchange ratio
Respiratory quotient
Systemic circulation
Tissue (biology)








Diving physics



Ambient pressure
Anti fog
Amontons' law
Archimedes' principle
Atmospheric pressure
Boyle's law
Breathing performance of regulators
Buoyancy
Charles' law
Combined gas law
Dalton's law
Diffusion
Diving physics
Force
Gay-Lussac's law
Henry's law
Hydrophobe
Hydrostatic pressure
Ideal gas law
Molecular diffusion
Neutral buoyancy
Partial pressure
Permeation
Pressure
Psychrometric constant
Solution
Solubility
Supersaturation
Surfactant
Surface tension
Torricellian chamber
Underwater vision
Weight








Diving environment



Algal bloom
Breaking wave
Current (ocean)
Current (stream)
Ekman transport
Halocline
Longshore current
Rip current
Stratification
Surf
Surge (wave action)
Thermocline
Tides
Turbidity
Undertow (wave action)
Upwelling








Researchers in
diving medicine,
physiology and physics



Arthur J. Bachrach
Albert R. Behnke
Paul Bert
George F. Bond
Sir Robert Boyle
Albert A. Bhlmann
William Paul Fife
John Scott Haldane
Leonard Erskine Hill
Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Christian J. Lambertsen
Simon Mitchell
Charles Momsen
John Rawlins (Royal Navy officer)
Charles Wesley Shilling
Jules Triger
Edward D. Thalmann








Related



Portal:Underwater diving
Artificial gills (human)
Aerospace Medical Association
Divers Alert Network
Diving Diseases Research Centre
List of diving hazards and precautions
National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology
Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine
Rubicon Foundation
South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society
United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit
Glossary of underwater diving terminology








 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 5390/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 49612/1500000
Post-expand include size: 115276/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 57471/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/40
Expensive parser function count: 2/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:527232-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130126051558 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fluid_statics&oldid=530919086"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: PressureHydrostaticsUnderwater diving physicsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2009All articles needing additional references  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 