
Octree
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 




Left: Recursive subdivision of a cube into octants. Right: The corresponding octree.


An octree is a tree data structure in which each internal node has exactly eight children. Octrees are most often used to partition a three dimensional space by recursively subdividing it into eight octants. Octrees are the three-dimensional analog of quadtrees. The name is formed from oct + tree, but note that it is normally written "octree" with only one "t". Octrees are often used in 3D graphics and 3D game engines.




Contents


1 Octrees for spatial representation
2 History
3 Common uses of octrees
4 Application to color quantization
5 See also
6 References
7 External links




[edit] Octrees for spatial representation
Each node in an octree subdivides the space it represents into eight octants. In a point region (PR) octree, the node stores an explicit 3-dimensional point, which is the "center" of the subdivision for that node; the point defines one of the corners for each of the eight children. In an MX octree, the subdivision point is implicitly the center of the space the node represents. The root node of a PR octree can represent infinite space; the root node of an MX octree must represent a finite bounded space so that the implicit centers are well-defined. Octrees are never considered k-d trees, as k-d trees split along a dimension and octrees split around a point and k-d trees are also always binary, which is not true of octrees. By using a depth-first search the nodes are to be traversed and only required surfaces are to be viewed.
[edit] History
The use of octrees for 3D computer graphics was pioneered by Donald Meagher at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, described in a 1980 report "Octree Encoding: A New Technique for the Representation, Manipulation and Display of Arbitrary 3-D Objects by Computer",[1] for which he holds a 1995 patent (with a 1984 priority date) "High-speed image generation of complex solid objects using octree encoding" [2]
[edit] Common uses of octrees

3D computer graphics
Spatial indexing
Nearest neighbor search
Efficient collision detection in three dimensions
View frustum culling
Fast Multipole Method
Unstructured grid
Finite element analysis
Sparse voxel octree
State estimation[3]

[edit] Application to color quantization
The octree color quantization algorithm, invented by Gervautz and Purgathofer in 1988, encodes image color data as an octree up to nine levels deep. Octrees are used because  and there are three color components in the RGB system. The node index to branch out from at the top level is determined by a formula that uses the most significant bits of the red, green, and blue color components, e.g. 4r + 2g + b. The next lower level uses the next bit significance, and so on. Less significant bits are sometimes ignored to reduce the tree size.
The algorithm is highly memory efficient because the tree's size can be limited. The bottom level of the octree consists of leaf nodes that accrue color data not represented in the tree; these nodes initially contain single bits. If much more than the desired number of palette colors are entered into the octree, its size can be continually reduced by seeking out a bottom-level node and averaging its bit data up into a leaf node, pruning part of the tree. Once sampling is complete, exploring all routes in the tree down to the leaf nodes, taking note of the bits along the way, will yield approximately the required number of colors.
[edit] See also

Quadtree
Bounding Interval Hierarchy
Klee's measure problem
Linear octrees
Cube 2, a 3D game engine in which geometry is almost entirely based on octrees
OGRE, has an Octree Scene Manager Implementation
Irrlicht Engine, supports octree scene nodes
id Tech 6 an in development 3D game engine that utilizes voxels stored in octrees
Voxel

[edit] References

^ Meagher, Donald (October 1980). "Octree Encoding: A New Technique for the Representation, Manipulation and Display of Arbitrary 3-D Objects by Computer". Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (Technical Report IPL-TR-80-111).
^ Meagher, Donald. "High-speed image generation of complex solid objects using octree encoding". USPO. http://www.google.com/patents/EP0152741B1?cl=en. Retrieved 20 September 2012.
^ Henning Eberhardt, Vesa Klumpp, Uwe D. Hanebeck, Density Trees for Efficient Nonlinear State Estimation, Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Information Fusion, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, July, 2010.

[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Octrees



Octree Quantization in Microsoft Systems Journal
Color Quantization using Octrees in Dr. Dobb's
Color Quantization using Octrees in Dr. Dobb's Source Code
Octree Color Quantization Overview
Parallel implementation of octtree generation algorithm, P. Sojan Lal, A Unnikrishnan, K Poulose Jacob, ICIP 1997, IEEE Digital Library
Generation of Octrees from Raster Scan with Reduced Information Loss, P. Sojan Lal, A Unnikrishnan, K Poulose Jacob, IASTED International conference VIIP 2001 [1]
C++ implementation (GPL license)
Parallel Octrees for Finite Element Applications
Cube 2: Sauerbraten - a game written in the octree-heavy Cube 2 engine
Ogre - A 3d Object-oriented Graphics Rendering Engine with a Octree Scene Manager Implementation (MIT license)
Dendro: parallel multigrid for octree meshes (MPI/C++ implementation)
Video: Use of an octree in state estimation









v
t
e


Trees in computer science






Binary trees



Binary search tree (BST)
Cartesian tree
MVP Tree
Top tree
T-tree








Self-balancing binary search trees



AA tree
AVL tree
LLRB tree
Redblack tree
Scapegoat tree
Splay tree
Treap








B-trees



B+ tree
B*-tree
Bx-tree
UB-tree
2-3 tree
2-3-4 tree
(a,b)-tree
Dancing tree
Htree








Tries



Suffix tree
Radix tree
Ternary search tree
X-fast trie
Y-fast trie








Binary space partitioning (BSP) trees



Quadtree
Octree
k-d tree
Implicit k-d tree
VP tree








Non-binary trees



Exponential tree
Fusion tree
Interval tree
PQ tree
Range tree
SPQR tree
Van Emde Boas tree








Spatial data partitioning trees



R-tree
R+ tree
R* tree
X-tree
M-tree
Segment tree
Hilbert R-tree
Priority R-tree








Other trees



Heap
Hash calendar
Hash tree
Finger tree
Order statistic tree
Metric tree
Cover tree
BK-tree
Doubly chained tree
iDistance
Link-cut tree
Fenwick tree








 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 1690/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 22306/1500000
Post-expand include size: 22015/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 5810/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/40
Expensive parser function count: 0/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:675699-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130121214316 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Octree&oldid=528724245"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Trees (data structures)Computer graphics data structuresDatabase index techniques  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 