
Packet switching
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 
(Redirected from Packet switched)
 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
Packet switching is a digital networking communications method that groups all transmitted data  regardless of content, type, or structure  into suitably sized blocks, called packets. First proposed for military uses in the early 1960s and implemented on small networks in 1968, this method of data transmission became the fundamental networking technology behind the Internet and most local area networks.
Packet switching features delivery of variable-bit-rate data streams (sequences of packets) over a shared network. When traversing network adapters, switches, routers and other network nodes, packets are buffered and queued, resulting in variable delay and throughput depending on the traffic load in the network.
Packet switching contrasts with another principal networking paradigm, circuit switching, a method which sets up a limited number of dedicated connections of constant bit rate and constant delay between nodes for exclusive use during the communication session. In case of traffic fees (as opposed to flat rate), for example in cellular communication services, circuit switching is characterized by a fee per time unit of connection time, even when no data is transferred, while packet switching is characterized by a fee per unit of information.
Two major packet switching modes exist; (1) connectionless packet switching, also known as datagram switching, and (2) connection-oriented packet switching, also known as virtual circuit switching. In the first case each packet includes complete addressing or routing information. The packets are routed individually, sometimes resulting in different paths and out-of-order delivery. In the second case a connection is defined and preallocated in each involved node during a connection phase before any packet is transferred. The packets include a connection identifier rather than address information, and are delivered in order. See below.
Packet mode communication may be utilized with or without intermediate forwarding nodes (packet switches or routers). In all the packet mode communication, network resources are managed by statistical multiplexing or dynamic bandwidth allocation in which a communication channel is effectively divided into an arbitrary number of logical variable-bit-rate channels or data streams. Statistical multiplexing, packet switching and other store-and-forward buffering introduces varying latency and throughput in the transmission. Each logical stream consists of a sequence of packets, which normally are forwarded by the multiplexers and intermediate network nodes asynchronously using first-in, first-out buffering. Alternatively, the packets may be forwarded according to some scheduling discipline for fair queuing, traffic shaping or for differentiated or guaranteed quality of service, such as weighted fair queuing or leaky bucket. In case of a shared physical medium, the packets may be delivered according to some packet-mode multiple access scheme.


Multiplex
techniques





Circuit mode
(constant bandwidth)


TDM FDM/WDM SDM
Polarization multiplexing
Spatial multiplexing (MIMO)
OAM multiplexing


Statistical multiplexing
(variable bandwidth)


Packet mode Dynamic TDM
FHSS DSSS
OFDMA SC-FDM MC-SS


Related topics


Channel access methods
Media Access Control (MAC)




This box:

view
talk
edit









Contents


1 History
2 Connectionless and connection-oriented packet switching
3 Packet switching in networks
4 X.25 vs. Frame Relay packet switching
5 See also
6 References

6.1 Bibliography


7 Further reading
8 External links




[edit] History
The concept of switching small blocks of data was first explored by Paul Baran in the early 1960s. Independently, Donald Davies at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in the UK had developed the same ideas a few years later (Abbate, 2000).
Leonard Kleinrock conducted early research in queueing theory which proved important in packet switching, and published a book in the related field of digital message switching (without the packets) in 1961; he also later played a leading role in building and management of the world's first packet-switched network, the ARPANET.
Baran developed the concept of message block switching during his research at the RAND Corporation for the US Air Force into survivable communications networks, first presented to the Air Force in the summer of 1961 as briefing B-265[1] then published as RAND Paper P-2626 in 1962 and then including and expanding somewhat within a series of eleven papers titled On Distributed Communications in 1964. Baran's P-2626 paper described a general architecture for a large-scale, distributed, survivable communications network. The paper focuses on three key ideas: first, use of a decentralized network with multiple paths between any two points; and second, dividing complete user messages into what he called message blocks (later called packets); then third, delivery of these messages by store and forward switching.
Baran's study made its way to Robert Taylor and J.C.R. Licklider at the Information Processing Technology Office, both wide-area network evangelists, and it helped influence Lawrence Roberts to adopt the technology when Taylor put him in charge of development of the ARPANET.
Baran's work was similar to the research performed independently by Donald Davies at the National Physical Laboratory, UK. In 1965, Davies developed the concept of packet-switched networks and proposed development of a UK wide network. He gave a talk on the proposal in 1966, after which a person from the Ministry of Defence (MoD) told him about Baran's work. A member of Davies' team met Lawrence Roberts at the 1967 ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles, bringing the two groups together.
Interestingly, Davies had chosen some of the same parameters for his original network design as Baran, such as a packet size of 1024 bits. In 1966 Davies proposed that a network should be built at the laboratory to serve the needs of NPL and prove the feasibility of packet switching. The NPL Data Communications Network entered service in 1970. Roberts and the ARPANET team took the name "packet switching" itself from Davies's work.
The first computer network and packet switching network deployed for computer resource sharing was the Octopus Network at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory that began connecting four Control Data 6600 computers to several shared storage devices (including an IBM 2321 Data Cell[2] in 1968 and an IBM Photostore[3] in 1970) and to several hundred Teletype Model 33 ASR terminals for time sharing use starting in 1968.[4]
In 1973 Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn wrote the specifications for Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), an internetworking protocol for sharing resources using packet-switching among the nodes.
[edit] Connectionless and connection-oriented packet switching
The service actually provided to the user by networks using packet switching nodes can be either connectionless (based on datagram messages), or virtual circuit switching (also known as connection oriented). Some connectionless protocols are Ethernet, IP, and UDP; connection oriented packet-switching protocols include X.25, Frame relay, Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS), and TCP.
In connection-oriented networks, each packet is labeled with a connection ID rather than an address. Address information is only transferred to each node during a connection set-up phase, when the route to the destination is discovered and an entry is added to the switching table in each network node through which the connection passes. The signalling protocols used allow the application to specify its requirements and the network to specify what capacity etc. is available, and acceptable values for service parameters to be negotiated. Routing a packet is very simple, as it just requires the node to look up the ID in the table. The packet header can be small, as it only needs to contain the ID and any information (such as length, timestamp, or sequence number) which is different for different packets.
In connectionless networks, each packet is labeled with a destination address, source address, and port numbers; it may also be labeled with the sequence number of the packet. This precludes the need for a dedicated path to help the packet find its way to its destination, but means that much more information is needed in the packet header, which is therefore larger, and this information needs to be looked up in power-hungry content-addressable memory. Each packet is dispatched and may go via different routes; potentially, the system has to do as much work for every packet as the connection-oriented system has to do in connection set-up, but with less information as to the application's requirements. At the destination, the original message/data is reassembled in the correct order, based on the packet sequence number. Thus a virtual connection, also known as a virtual circuit or byte stream is provided to the end-user by a transport layer protocol, although intermediate network nodes only provides a connectionless network layer service.
[edit] Packet switching in networks
Main article: Packet switched network
Packet switching is used to optimize the use of the channel capacity available in digital telecommunication networks such as computer networks, to minimize the transmission latency (the time it takes for data to pass across the network), and to increase robustness of communication.
The best-known use of packet switching is the Internet and most local area networks. The Internet is implemented by the Internet Protocol Suite using a variety of Link Layer technologies. For example, Ethernet and Frame Relay are common. Newer mobile phone technologies (e.g., GPRS, I-mode) also use packet switching.
X.25 is a notable use of packet switching in that, despite being based on packet switching methods, it provided virtual circuits to the user. These virtual circuits carry variable-length packets. In 1978, X.25 provided the first international and commercial packet switching network, the International Packet Switched Service (IPSS). Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) also is a virtual circuit technology, which uses fixed-length cell relay connection oriented packet switching.
Datagram packet switching is also called connectionless networking because no connections are established. Technologies such as Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) and the resource reservation protocol (RSVP) create virtual circuits on top of datagram networks. Virtual circuits are especially useful in building robust failover mechanisms and allocating bandwidth for delay-sensitive applications.
MPLS and its predecessors, as well as ATM, have been called "fast packet" technologies. MPLS, indeed, has been called "ATM without cells".[5] Modern routers, however, do not require these technologies to be able to forward variable-length packets at multigigabit speeds across the network.
[edit] X.25 vs. Frame Relay packet switching
Both X.25 and Frame Relay provide connection-oriented packet switching, also known as virtual circuit switching. A major difference between X.25 and Frame Relay packet switching is that X.25 is a reliable protocol, based on node-to-node automatic repeat request, while Frame Relay is a non-reliable protocol, maximum packet length is 1000 bytes. Any retransmissions must be carried out by higher layer protocols. The X.25 protocol is a network layer protocol, and is part of the X.25 protocol suite, also known as the OSI protocol suite. It was widely used in switching networks during the 1980s and early 1990s, for example as an alternative to circuit mode terminal switching, and for automated teller machines. Frame relay is a further development of X.25. The simplicity of Frame Relay made it considerably faster and more cost effective than X.25 packet switching. Frame relay is a data link layer protocol, and does not provide logical addresses and routing. It is only used for "semi-permanent" connections, while X.25 connections also can be established for each communication session. Frame Relay was used to interconnect LANs or LAN segments, mainly in the 1990s by large companies that had a requirement to handle heavy telecommunications traffic across wide area networks.[6]:250 Despite the benefits of frame relay packet switching, many international companies are staying with the X.25 standard. In the United States, X.25 packet switching was used heavily in government and financial networks that use mainframe applications. Many companies did not intend to cross over to Frame Relay packet switching because it is more cost effective to use X.25 on slower networks. In certain parts of the world, particularly in Asia-Pacific and South America regions, X.25 was the only technology available.[7]
[edit] See also

Message switching
Circuit switching
Store and forward delay
Time-Driven Switching - a bufferless approach to packet switching
Public switched data network
Packet switched network
Optical burst switching

[edit] References


^ Stewart, Bill (2000-01-07). "Paul Baran Invents Packet Switching". Living Internet. http://www.livinginternet.com/i/ii_rand.htm. Retrieved 2008-05-08.
^ The IBM 2321 Data Cell Drive, Columbia University Computing History
^ The IBM 1360 Photostore, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory Computing History
^ Mendicino, Samuel (1970-11-30). "Octopus: The Lawrence Radiation Laboratory Network". http://www.rogerdmoore.ca/PS/OCTOA/OCTO.html. Retrieved 2009-05-06.
^ Interview with the author (of an MPLS-based VPN article), G. Pildush
^ OBrien, J. A. & Marakas, G. M. (2009). Management Information Systems (9th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
^ Girard, K. (1997, January). X.25 users remaining loyal despite frame-relay hype. Computerworld, 31(4), 16. Retrieved March 6, 2009, from ABI/INFORM Global database. (Document ID: 10946641).


[edit] Bibliography

Leonard Kleinrock, Information Flow in Large Communication Nets, (MIT, Cambridge, May 31, 1961) Proposal for a Ph.D. Thesis
Leonard Kleinrock. Information Flow in Large Communication Nets (RLE Quarterly Progress Report, July 1961)
Leonard Kleinrock. Communication Nets: Stochastic Message Flow and Delay (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1964)
Paul Baran et al., On Distributed Communications, Volumes I-XI (RAND Corporation Research Documents, August, 1964)

Paul Baran, On Distributed Communications: I Introduction to Distributed Communications Network (RAND Memorandum RM-3420-PR. August 1964)


Paul Baran, On Distributed Communications Networks, (IEEE Transactions on Communications Systems, Vol. CS-12 No. 1, pp. 1-9, March 1964)
D. W. Davies, K. A. Bartlett, R. A. Scantlebury, and P. T. Wilkinson, A digital communications network for computers giving rapid response at remote terminals (ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles. October 1967)
R. A. Scantlebury, P. T. Wilkinson, and K. A. Bartlett, The design of a message switching Centre for a digital communication network (IFIP 1968)
Larry Roberts and Tom Merrill, Toward a Cooperative Network of Time-Shared Computers (Fall AFIPS Conference. October 1966)
Lawrence Roberts, The Evolution of Packet Switching (Proceedings of the IEEE, November, 1978)

[edit] Further reading

Katie Hafner, Where Wizards Stay Up Late (Simon and Schuster, 1996) pp 5267
Janet Abbate, Inventing the Internet (MIT Press, 2000) ISBN 0-262-51115-0
Arthur Norberg, Judy E. O'Neill, Transforming Computer Technology: Information Processing for the Pentagon, 1962-1982 (Johns Hopkins University, 1996)

[edit] External links

Oral history interview with Paul Baran. Charles Babbage Institute University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Baran describes his working environment at RAND, as well as his initial interest in survivable communications, and the evolution, writing and distribution of his eleven-volume work, "On Distributed Communications." Baran discusses his interaction with the group at ARPA who were responsible for the later development of the ARPANET.
Packet Switching History and Design, site reviewed by Baran, Roberts, and Kleinrock
Paul Baran and the Origins of the Internet
A Brief History of the Internet

This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.









v
t
e


Telecommunications






History



Beacons
Broadcasting
Communications satellites
Computer networks
Drums
Electrical telegraphs
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraphs
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phones
Optical telegraphy
Photophones
Radio
Radiotelephones
Smoke signals
Telegraphy
Telephones
The Telephone Cases
Television
Undersea telegraph lines
Videotelephony











Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Lee De Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Guglielmo Marconi
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Papin Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin








Transmission media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Telephone lines
Terrestrial microwave








Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Packet switched
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








Geographic







v
t
e


Telecommunications in Africa






Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Cte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
So Tom and Prncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe








States with limited
recognition



Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland








Dependencies and
other territories



Canary Islands/ Ceuta/ Melilla/ Plazas de soberana(Spain)
Madeira(Portugal)
Mayotte/ Runion(France)
Saint Helena/ Ascension Island/ Tristan da Cunha(United Kingdom)
Western Sahara










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Asia






Sovereign
states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
People's Republic of China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan








Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Europe






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria








Dependencies and
other territories



land
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard








Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Telecommunications in North America






Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States








Dependencies and
other territories



Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Navassa Island
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthlemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Oceania






Sovereign states



Australia
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu








Dependencies and
other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cook Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Niue
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Telecommunications in South America






Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela








Dependencies and
other territories



Aruba
Bonaire
Curaao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands











 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 16997/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 43616/1500000
Post-expand include size: 235795/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 152008/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/40
Expensive parser function count: 12/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:43339-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20121220204513 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Packet_switching&oldid=528922335"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Packets (information technology)Computer networkingHistory of the Internet  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 