
Pressure
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
This article is about pressure in the physical sciences.  For other uses, see Pressure (disambiguation).




Pressure as exerted by particle collisions inside a closed container.





Pressure



Common symbol(s):
P


SI unit:
Pascal (Pa)


Derivations from other quantities:
P = F / A




Thermodynamics



The classical Carnot heat engine





Branches
Classical Statistical Chemical
Equilibrium / Non-equilibrium






Laws
Zeroth First Second Third






Systems
State:
Equation of state
Ideal gas Real gas
Phase of matter Equilibrium
Control volume Instruments

Processes:
Isobaric Isochoric Isothermal
Adiabatic Isentropic Isenthalpic
Quasistatic Polytropic
Free expansion
Reversibility Irreversibility
Endoreversibility

Cycles:
Heat engines Heat pumps
Thermal efficiency






System properties
Property diagrams
Intensive and extensive properties

Functions of state:
Temperature / Entropy (intro.) 
Pressure / Volume 
Chemical potential / Particle no. 
( Conjugate variables)
Vapor quality
Reduced properties

Process functions:
Work Heat






Material properties




Specific heat capacity















Compressibility















Thermal expansion
















Property database






Equations
Carnot's theorem Clausius theorem Fundamental relation Ideal gas law Maxwell relations Onsager reciprocal relations

Table of thermodynamic equations






Potentials
Free energy Free entropy




Internal energy



Enthalpy



Helmholtz free energy



Gibbs free energy











History and culture
Philosophy:
Entropy and time Entropy and life
Brownian ratchet
Maxwell's demon
Heat death paradox
Loschmidt's paradox
Synergetics

History:
General Heat Entropy Gas laws
Perpetual motion
Theories:
Caloric theory Vis viva
Theory of heat
Mechanical equivalent of heat
Motive power
Publications:
"An Experimental Enquiry Concerning ... Heat"
"On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances"
"Reflections on the
Motive Power of Fire"

Timelines of:
Thermodynamics Heat engines

Art:
Maxwell's thermodynamic surface

Education:
Entropy as energy dispersal






Scientists
Bernoulli Carnot Clapeyron Clausius von Helmholtz Carathodory Pierre Duhem Gibbs Joule Maxwell von Mayer Onsager Rankine Smeaton Stahl Thompson Kelvin Waterson







v
t
e





Pressure (the symbol: p) is the ratio of force to the area over which that force is distributed.
In other words, pressure is force per unit area applied in a direction perpendicular to the surface of an object. Gauge pressure (also spelled gage pressure)[a] is the pressure relative to the local atmospheric or ambient pressure. While pressure may be measured in any unit of force divided by any unit of area, the SI unit of pressure (the newton per square metre) is called the pascal (Pa) after the seventeenth-century philosopher and scientist Blaise Pascal. A pressure of 1 Pa is small; it approximately equals the pressure exerted by a dollar bill resting flat on a table. Everyday pressures are often stated in kilopascals (1 kPa = 1000 Pa).




Contents


1 Definition

1.1 Formula
1.2 Units
1.3 Examples
1.4 Scalar nature


2 Types

2.1 Fluid pressure

2.1.1 Applications


2.2 Explosion or deflagration pressures
2.3 Negative pressures
2.4 Stagnation pressure
2.5 Surface pressure
2.6 Pressure of an ideal gas
2.7 Vapor pressure
2.8 Liquid pressure
2.9 Direction of liquid pressure
2.10 Kinematic pressure


3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 External links




[edit] Definition
Pressure is the effect of a force applied to a surface. Pressure is the amount of force acting per unit area. The symbol of pressure is p.[b][1]
[edit] Formula


Conjugate variables
of thermodynamics


Pressure
Volume


(Stress)
(Strain)


Temperature
Entropy


Chemical potential
Particle number


Mathematically:



where:

 is the pressure,
 is the normal force,
 is the area of the surface on contact.

For liquids, the formula may be written:



where:

 is the pressure,
 is the density of the liquid,
 (the value is equal to the gravitational acceleration),
 is the depth of the liquid in meters.

Pressure is a scalar quantity. It relates the vector surface element (a vector normal to the surface) with the normal force acting on it. The pressure is the scalar proportionality constant that relates the two normal vectors:



The minus (-) sign comes from the fact that the force is considered towards the surface element, while the normal vector points outward.
It is incorrect (although rather usual) to say "the pressure is directed in such or such direction". The pressure, as a scalar, has no direction. The force given by the previous relationship to the quantity has a direction, but the pressure does not. If we change the orientation of the surface element, the direction of the normal force changes accordingly, but the pressure remains the same.
Pressure is transmitted to solid boundaries or across arbitrary sections of fluid normal to these boundaries or sections at every point. It is a fundamental parameter in thermodynamics, and it is conjugate to volume.
[edit] Units




Mercury column


The SI unit for pressure is the pascal (Pa), equal to one newton per square meter (N/m2 or kgm1s2). This special name for the unit was added in 1971;[2] before that, pressure in SI was expressed simply as N/m2.
Non-SI measures such as pounds per square inch and bars are used in some parts of the world, primarily in the United States of America. The cgs unit of pressure is the barye (ba), equal to 1dyncm2 or 0.1Pa. Pressure is sometimes expressed in grams-force/cm2, or as kg/cm2 and the like without properly identifying the force units. But using the names kilogram, gram, kilogram-force, or gram-force (or their symbols) as units of force is expressly forbidden in SI. The technical atmosphere (symbol: at) is 1kgf/cm2 (14.223psi).
Since a system under pressure has potential to perform work on its surroundings, pressure is a measure of potential energy stored per unit volume measured in Jm3, related to energy density.
Some meteorologists prefer the hectopascal (hPa) for atmospheric air pressure, which is equivalent to the older unit millibar (mbar). Similar pressures are given in kilopascals (kPa) in most other fields, where the hecto- prefix is rarely used. The inch of mercury is still used in the United States. Oceanographers usually measure underwater pressure in decibars (dbar) because an increase in pressure of 1dbar is approximately equal to an increase in depth of 1meter.
The standard atmosphere (atm) is an established constant. It is approximately equal to typical air pressure at earth mean sea level and is defined as follows:

standard atmosphere = 101,325Pa = 101.325kPa = 1,013.25hPa.

Because pressure is commonly measured by its ability to displace a column of liquid in a manometer, pressures are often expressed as a depth of a particular fluid (e.g., centimeters of water, mm or inches of mercury). The most common choices are mercury (Hg) and water; water is nontoxic and readily available, while mercury's high density allows a shorter column (and so a smaller manometer) to be used to measure a given pressure. The pressure exerted by a column of liquid of height h and density  is given by the hydrostatic pressure equation p = gh. Fluid density and local gravity can vary from one reading to another depending on local factors, so the height of a fluid column does not define pressure precisely. When millimeters of mercury or inches of mercury are quoted today, these units are not based on a physical column of mercury; rather, they have been given precise definitions that can be expressed in terms of SI units.[citation needed] One mmHg (millimeter of mercury) is equal to one torr. The water-based units still depend on the density of water, a measured, rather than defined, quantity. These manometric units are still encountered in many fields. Blood pressure is measured in millimeters of mercury in most of the world, and lung pressures in centimeters of water are still common.
Underwater divers use the metre sea water (msw or MSW) and foot sea water (fsw or FSW) units of pressure, and these are the standard units for pressure gauges used to measure pressure exposure in diving chambers and personal decompression computers. A msw is defined as 0.1 bar, and is not the same as a linear metre of depth, and 33.066fsw = 1atm.[3] Note that the pressure conversion from msw to fsw is different from the length conversion: 10msw = 32.6336fsw, while 10m = 32.8083ft
Gauge pressure is often given in units with 'g' appended, e.g. 'kPag' or 'psig', and units for measurements of absolute pressure are sometimes given a suffix of 'a', to avoid confusion, for example 'kPaa', 'psia'. However, the US National Institute of Standards and Technology recommends that, to avoid confusion, any modifiers be instead applied to the quantity being measured rather than the unit of measure[4] For example, "Pg = 100 psi" rather than "P = 100 psig".
Differential pressure is expressed in units with 'd' appended; this type of measurement is useful when considering sealing performance or whether a valve will open or close.
Presently or formerly popular pressure units include the following:

atmosphere (atm)
manometric units:

centimeter, inch, and millimeter of mercury (torr)
Height of equivalent column of water, including millimeter (mm H2O), centimeter (cm H2O), meter, inch, and foot of water


customary units:

kip, ton-force (short), ton-force (long), pound-force, ounce-force, and poundal per square inch
ton-force (short), and ton-force (long) per square inch
fsw (feet sea water) used in underwater diving, particularly in connection with diving pressure exposure and decompression


non-SI metric units:

bar, decibar, millibar

msw (metres sea water), used in underwater diving, particularly in connection with diving pressure exposure and decompression


kilogram-force, or kilopond, per square centimeter (technical atmosphere)
gram-force and tonne-force (metric ton-force) per square centimeter
barye (dyne per square centimeter)
kilogram-force and tonne-force per square meter
sthene per square meter (pieze)




Pressure units




v
t
e



pascal
bar
technical atmosphere
standard atmosphere
torr
pounds per square inch


Pa
bar
at
atm
Torr
psi


1 Pa
 1 N/m2
105
1.0197105
9.8692106
7.5006103
1.450377104


1 bar
105
 106dyn/cm2
1.0197
0.98692
750.06
14.50377


1 at
0.980665 105
0.980665
 1 kp/cm2
0.9678411
735.5592
14.22334


1 atm
1.01325 105
1.01325
1.0332
 p0
 760
14.69595


1 Torr
133.3224
1.333224103
1.359551103
1.315789103
 1mmHg
1.933678102


1 psi
6.8948103
6.8948102
7.03069102
6.8046102
51.71493
 1 lbF/in2



[edit] Examples
As an example of varying pressures, a finger can be pressed against a wall without making any lasting impression; however, the same finger pushing a thumbtack can easily damage the wall. Although the force applied to the surface is the same, the thumbtack applies more pressure because the point concentrates that force into a smaller area. Pressure is transmitted to solid boundaries or across arbitrary sections of fluid normal to these boundaries or sections at every point. Unlike stress, pressure is defined as a scalar quantity. The negative gradient of pressure is called the force density.
Another example is of a common knife. If we try to cut a fruit with the flat side it obviously will not cut. But if we take the thin side, it will cut smoothly. The reason is that the flat side has a greater surface area (less pressure) and so it does not cut the fruit. When we take the thin side, the surface area is reduced and so it cuts the fruit easily and quickly. This is one example of a practical application of pressure.
For gases, pressure is sometimes measured not as an absolute pressure, but relative to atmospheric pressure; such measurements are called gauge pressure. An example of this is the air pressure in an automobile tire, which might be said to be "220kPa (32psi)", but is actually 220kPa (32psi) above atmospheric pressure. Since atmospheric pressure at sea level is about 100kPa (14.7psi), the absolute pressure in the tire is therefore about 320kPa (46.7psi). In technical work, this is written "a gauge pressure of 220kPa (32psi)". Where space is limited, such as on pressure gauges, name plates, graph labels, and table headings, the use of a modifier in parentheses, such as "kPa (gauge)" or "kPa (absolute)", is permitted. In non-SI technical work, a gauge pressure of 32psi is sometimes written as "32psig" and an absolute pressure as "32psia", though the other methods explained above that avoid attaching characters to the unit of pressure are preferred.[5]
Gauge pressure is the relevant measure of pressure wherever one is interested in the stress on storage vessels and the plumbing components of fluidics systems. However, whenever equation-of-state properties, such as densities or changes in densities, must be calculated, pressures must be expressed in terms of their absolute values. For instance, if the atmospheric pressure is 100kPa, a gas (such as helium) at 200kPa (gauge) (300kPa [absolute]) is 50% denser than the same gas at 100kPa (gauge) (200kPa [absolute]). Focusing on gauge values, one might erroneously conclude the first sample had twice the density of the second one.
[edit] Scalar nature
In a static gas, the gas as a whole does not appear to move. The individual molecules of the gas, however, are in constant random motion. Because we are dealing with an extremely large number of molecules and because the motion of the individual molecules is random in every direction, we do not detect any motion. If we enclose the gas within a container, we detect a pressure in the gas from the molecules colliding with the walls of our container. We can put the walls of our container anywhere inside the gas, and the force per unit area (the pressure) is the same. We can shrink the size of our "container" down to an infinitely small point, and the pressure has a single value at that point. Therefore, pressure is a scalar quantity, not a vector quantity. It has magnitude but no direction sense associated with it. Pressure acts in all directions at a point inside a gas. At the surface of a gas, the pressure force acts perpendicular (at right angle) to the surface.
A closely related quantity is the stress tensor , which relates the vector force F to the vector area A via



This tensor may be divided up into a scalar part (pressure) and a traceless tensor part shear. The shear tensor gives the force in directions parallel to the surface, usually due to viscous or frictional forces. The stress tensor is sometimes called the pressure tensor, but in the following, the term "pressure" will refer only to the scalar pressure.
According to the theory of general relativity, pressure increases the strength of a gravitational field (see stress-energy tensor) and so adds to the mass-energy cause of gravity. This effect is unnoticeable at everyday pressures but is significant in neutron stars, although it has not been experimentally tested.[6]
[edit] Types
[edit] Fluid pressure
Fluid pressure is the pressure at some point within a fluid, such as water or air (for more information specifically about liquid pressure, see section below).
Fluid pressure occurs in one of two situations:

an open condition, called "open channel flow"

the ocean, or
swimming pool, or
the atmosphere.


a closed condition, called closed conduits

water line, or
gas line.



Pressure in open conditions usually can be approximated as the pressure in "static" or non-moving conditions (even in the ocean where there are waves and currents), because the motions create only negligible changes in the pressure. Such conditions conform with principles of fluid statics. The pressure at any given point of a non-moving (static) fluid is called the hydrostatic pressure.
Closed bodies of fluid are either "static", when the fluid is not moving, or "dynamic", when the fluid can move as in either a pipe or by compressing an air gap in a closed container. The pressure in closed conditions conforms with the principles of fluid dynamics.
The concepts of fluid pressure are predominantly attributed to the discoveries of Blaise Pascal and Daniel Bernoulli. Bernoulli's equation can be used in almost any situation to determine the pressure at any point in a fluid. The equation makes some assumptions about the fluid, such as the fluid being ideal[7] and incompressible.[7] An ideal fluid is a fluid in which there is no friction, it is inviscid,[7] zero viscosity.[7] The equation is written between any two points a and b in a system that contain the same fluid.

[8]

where:

p = pressure of the fluid
 = g = densityacceleration of gravity = specific weight of the fluid.[7]
v = velocity of the fluid
g = acceleration of gravity
z = elevation
 = pressure head
 = velocity head

[edit] Applications

Artesian well
Blood pressure
Hydraulic head
Plant cell turgidity
Pythagorean cup

[edit] Explosion or deflagration pressures
Explosion or deflagration pressures are the result of the ignition of explosive gases, mists, dust/air suspensions, in unconfined and confined spaces.
[edit] Negative pressures
While pressures are, in general, positive, there are several situations in which negative pressures may be encountered:

When dealing in relative (gauge) pressures. For instance, an absolute pressure of 80kPa may be described as a gauge pressure of 21kPa (i.e., 21kPa below an atmospheric pressure of 101kPa).
When attractive forces (e.g., van der Waals forces) between the particles of a fluid exceed repulsive forces. Such scenarios are generally unstable since the particles will move closer together until repulsive forces balance attractive forces. Negative pressure exists in the transpiration pull of plants, and is used to suction water even higher than the ten meters that it rises in a pure vacuum.
The Casimir effect can create a small attractive force due to interactions with vacuum energy; this force is sometimes termed "vacuum pressure" (not to be confused with the negative gauge pressure of a vacuum).
Depending on how the orientation of a surface is chosen, the same distribution of forces may be described either as a positive pressure along one surface normal, or as a negative pressure acting along the opposite surface normal.
In the cosmological constant.

[edit] Stagnation pressure
Stagnation pressure is the pressure a fluid exerts when it is forced to stop moving. Consequently, although a fluid moving at higher speed will have a lower static pressure, it may have a higher stagnation pressure when forced to a standstill. Static pressure and stagnation pressure are related by the Mach number of the fluid. In addition, there can be differences in pressure due to differences in the elevation (height) of the fluid. See Bernoulli's equation (note: Bernoulli's equation only applies for incompressible, inviscid flow).
The pressure of a moving fluid can be measured using a Pitot tube, or one of its variations such as a Kiel probe or Cobra probe, connected to a manometer. Depending on where the inlet holes are located on the probe, it can measure static pressures or stagnation pressures.
[edit] Surface pressure
There is a two-dimensional analog of pressure  the lateral force per unit length applied on a line perpendicular to the force.
Surface pressure is denoted by  and shares many similar properties with three-dimensional pressure. Properties of surface chemicals can be investigated by measuring pressure/area isotherms, as the two-dimensional analog of Boyle's law, A = k, at constant temperature.



[edit] Pressure of an ideal gas
Main article: Ideal gas law
In an ideal gas, molecules have no volume and do not interact. Pressure varies linearly with temperature, volume, and quantity according to the ideal gas law,



where:

P is the absolute pressure of the gas
n is the amount of substance
T is the absolute temperature
V is the volume
R is the ideal gas constant.

Real gases exhibit a more complex dependence on the variables of state.[9]
[edit] Vapor pressure
Main article: Vapor pressure
Vapor pressure is the pressure of a vapor in thermodynamic equilibrium with its condensed phases in a closed system. All liquids and solids have a tendency to evaporate into a gaseous form, and all gases have a tendency to condense back to their liquid or solid form.
The atmospheric pressure boiling point of a liquid (also known as the normal boiling point) is the temperature at which the vapor pressure equals the ambient atmospheric pressure. With any incremental increase in that temperature, the vapor pressure becomes sufficient to overcome atmospheric pressure and lift the liquid to form vapor bubbles inside the bulk of the substance. Bubble formation deeper in the liquid requires a higher pressure, and therefore higher temperature, because the fluid pressure increases above the atmospheric pressure as the depth increases.
The vapor pressure that a single component in a mixture contributes to the total pressure in the system is called partial vapor pressure.
[edit] Liquid pressure
See also: Fluid statics#Pressure in fluids at rest


Continuum mechanics







Laws


Conservation of mass
Conservation of momentum
Conservation of energy
Entropy inequality








Solid mechanics


Solids
Stress
Deformation
Compatibility
Finite strain
Infinitesimal strain
Elasticity

linear


Plasticity
Bending
Hooke's law
Failure theory
Fracture mechanics
Contact mechanics

Frictionless
Frictional










Fluid mechanics


Fluids
Fluid statics
Fluid dynamics
NavierStokes equations
Bernoulli's principle
Buoyancy
Viscosity

Newtonian
Non-Newtonian


Archimedes' principle
Pascal's law
Pressure
Liquids
Surface tension
Capillary action
Gases
Atmosphere
Boyle's law
Charles's law
Gay-Lussac's law
Combined gas law
Plasma








Rheology


Viscoelasticity
Smart fluids

Magnetorheological
Electrorheological
Ferrofluids


Rheometry
Rheometer








Scientists


Bernoulli
Boyle
Cauchy
Charles
Euler
Gay-Lussac
Hooke
Pascal
Newton
Navier
Stokes









v
t
e





When a person swims under the water, water pressure is felt acting on the person's eardrums. The deeper that person swims, the greater the pressure. The pressure felt is due to the weight of the water above the person. As someone swims deeper, there is more water above you and therefore greater pressure. The pressure a liquid exerts depends on its depth.
Liquid pressure also depends on the density of the liquid. If someone was submerged in a liquid more dense than water, the pressure would be correspondingly greater. The pressure due to a liquid in liquid columns of constant density or at a depth within a substance is represented by the following formula:



where:

P is liquid pressure
g is gravity at the surface of overlaying material
 is density of liquid
h is height of liquid column or depth within a substance

Another way of saying this same formula is the following:





Derivation of this equation


This is derived from the definitions of pressure and weight density. Consider an area at the bottom of a vessel of liquid. The weight of the column of liquid directly above this area produces pressure. From the definition:



we can express this weight of liquid as



where the volume of the column is simply the area multiplied by the depth. Then we have






With the "area" in the numerator and the "area" in the denominator canceling each other out, we are left with:



Written with symbols, this is our original equation:






The pressure a liquid exerts against the sides and bottom of a container depends on the density and the depth of the liquid. If atmospheric pressure is neglected, liquid pressure against the bottom is twice as great at twice the depth; at three times the depth, the liquid pressure is threefold; etc. Or, if the liquid is two or three times as dense, the liquid pressure is correspondingly two or three times as great for any given depth. Liquids are practically incompressible - that is, their volume can hardly be changed by pressure (water volume decreases by only 50 millionths of its original volume for each atmospheric increase in pressure. Thus, except for small changes produced by temperature, the density of a particular liquid is practically the same at all depths.
Atmospheric pressure pressing on the surface of a liquid must be taken into account when trying to discover the total pressure acting on a liquid. The total pressure of a liquid, then, is gh + the pressure of the atmosphere. When this distinction is important, the term total pressure is used. Otherwise, discussions of liquid pressure refer to pressure without regard to the normally ever-present atmospheric pressure.
It is important to recognize that the pressure does not depend on the amount of liquid present. Volume is not the important factor - depth is. The average water pressure acting against a dam depends on the average depth of the water and not on the volume of water held back. For example, a large, shallow lake with a height of 3 m exerts only half the average pressure that the 6 m-tall small, deep pond does. A person will feel the same pressure whether his/her head is dunked a meter beneath the surface of the water in a small pool or to the same depth in the middle of a large lake. If four vases contain different amounts of water but are all filled to equal depths, then a fish with its head dunked a few centimeters under the surface will be acted on by water pressure that is the same in any of the vases. If the fish swims a few centimeters deeper, the pressure on the fish will increase with depth and be the same no matter which vase the fish is in. If the fish swims to the bottom, the pressure will be greater, but it makes no difference what vase it is in. All vases are filled to equal depths, so the water pressure is the same at the bottom of each vase, regardless of its shape or volume. If water pressure at the bottom of a vase were greater than water pressure at the bottom of a neighboring vase, the greater pressure would force water sideways and then up the narrower vase to a higher level until the pressures at the bottom were equalized. Pressure is depth dependent, not volume dependent, so there is a reason that water seeks its own level.
[edit] Direction of liquid pressure
An experimentally determined fact about liquid pressure is that it is exerted equally in all directions.[10] If someone is submerged in water, no matter which way that person tilts his/her head, the person will feel the same amount of water pressure on his/her ears. Because a liquid can flow, this pressure isn't only downward. Pressure is seen acting sideways when water spurts sideways from a leak in the side of an upright can. Pressure also acts upward, as demonstrated when someone tries to push a beach ball beneath the surface of the water. The bottom of a boat is pushed upward by water pressure (buoyancy).
When a liquid presses against a surface, there is a net force that is perpendicular to the surface. Although pressure doesn't have a specific direction, force does. A submerged triangular block has water forced against each point from many directions, but components of the force that are not perpendicular to the surface cancel each other out, leaving only a net perpendicular point.[10] This is why water spurting from a hole in a bucket initially exits the bucket in a direction at right angles to the surface of the bucket in which the hole is located.Then it curves downward due to gravity. If there are three holes in a bucket (top, bottom, and middle), then the force vectors perpendicular to the inner container surface will increase with increasing depth - that is, a greater pressure at the bottom makes it so that the bottom hole will shoot water out the farthest. The force exerted by a fluid on a smooth surface is always at right angles to the surface. The speed of liquid out of the hole is , where h is the depth below the free surface.[10] Interestingly, this is the same speed the water (or anything else) would have if freely falling the same vertical distance h.
[edit] Kinematic pressure



is the kinematic pressure, where  is the pressure and  constant mass density. The SI unit of P is m2/s2. Kinematic pressure is used in the same manner as kinematic viscosity  in order to compute Navier-Stokes equation without explicitly showing the density .

Navier-Stokes equation with kinematic quantities


[edit] See also




Underwater diving  portal









Atmospheric pressure
Blood pressure
Boyle's Law
Combined gas law
Conversion of units
Critical point (thermodynamics)
Dynamic pressure
Hydraulics
Internal pressure
Kinetic theory
Microphone






Orders of magnitude (pressure)
Partial pressure
Pressure measurement
Pressure sensor
Sound pressure
Spouting can
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology
Units conversion by factor-label
Vacuum
Vacuum pump
Vertical pressure variation






[edit] Notes


^ The preferred spelling varies by country and even by industry. Further, both spellings are often used within a particular industry or country. Industries in British English-speaking countries typically use the "gauge" spelling. Many of the largest US manufacturers of pressure transducers and instrumentation use the spelling "gage pressure" in their most formal documentation sensotec.com Honeywell-Sensotec's FAQ page and fluke.com, Fluke Corporation's product search page.
^ The usage of P vs p is context-driven. It depends on the field in which one is working, on the nearby presence of other symbols for quantities such as power and momentum, and on writing style.


[edit] References


^ Giancoli, Douglas G. (2004). Physics: principles with applications. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Education. ISBN0-13-060620-0.
^ "14th Conference of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures". Bipm.fr. http://www.bipm.fr/en/convention/cgpm/14/pascal-siemens.html. Retrieved 2012-03-27.
^ a b US Navy (2006). US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision. United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. pp.232. http://www.supsalv.org/00c3_publications.asp?destPage=00c3&pageID=3.9. Retrieved 2008-06-15.
^ "Rules and Style Conventions for Expressing Values of Quantities". NIST. http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/SP811/sec07.html#7.4. Retrieved 2009-07-07.
^ NIST, Rules and Style Conventions for Expressing Values of Quantities, Sect. 7.4.
^ "Einstein's gravity under pressure". Springerlink.com. http://www.springerlink.com