
Radio waves
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
For other uses, see Radio Waves (disambiguation).
Radio waves are a type of electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum longer than infrared light. Radio waves have frequencies from 300 GHz to as low as 3 kHz, and corresponding wavelengths from 1 millimeter to 100 kilometers. Like all other electromagnetic waves, they travel at the speed of light. Naturally occurring radio waves are made by lightning, or by astronomical objects. Artificially generated radio waves are used for fixed and mobile radio communication, broadcasting, radar and other navigation systems, communications satellites, computer networks and innumerable other applications. Different frequencies of radio waves have different propagation characteristics in the Earth's atmosphere; long waves may cover a part of the Earth very consistently, shorter waves can reflect off the ionosphere and travel around the world, and much shorter wavelengths bend or reflect very little and travel on a line of sight.




Diagram of the electric fields (E) and magnetic fields (H) of radio waves emitted by a monopole radio transmitting antenna (small dark vertical line in the center). The E and H fields are perpendicular as implied by the phase diagram in the lower right.






Contents


1 Discovery and utilization
2 Propagation
3 Speed, wavelength and frequency
4 Radio communication
5 In medicine
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References




[edit] Discovery and utilization
Main article: History of radio




Rough plot of Earth's atmospheric transmittance (or opacity) to various wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, including radio waves.


Radio waves were first predicted by mathematical work done in 1867 by James Clerk Maxwell.[1] Maxwell noticed wavelike properties of light and similarities in electrical and magnetic observations. He then proposed equations that described light waves and radio waves as waves of electromagnetism that travel in space. In 1887, Heinrich Hertz demonstrated the reality of Maxwell's electromagnetic waves by experimentally generating radio waves in his laboratory.[2] Many inventions followed, making the use of radio waves to transfer information through space.
[edit] Propagation
Main article: Radio propagation
The study of electromagnetic phenomena such as reflection, refraction, polarization, diffraction, and absorption is of critical importance in the study of how radio waves move in free space and over the surface of the Earth. Different frequencies experience different combinations of these phenomena in the Earth's atmosphere, making certain radio bands more useful for specific purposes than others.
[edit] Speed, wavelength and frequency
Radio waves travel at the speed of light in a vacuum.[3][4] If radio waves strike an electrically conductive object of any size, they are slowed according to that object's permeability and permittivity.
The wavelength is the distance from one 'peak' of magnetic flux to the next, or the peak of one 'wave' to the next, and is inversely proportional to the frequency. The distance a radio wave travels in one second, in a vacuum, is 299,792,458 meters which is the wavelength of a 1 hertz radio signal. A 1 megahertz radio signal has a wavelength of 299.8 meters.
[edit] Radio communication
In order to receive radio signals, for instance from AM/FM radio stations, a radio antenna must be used. However, since the antenna will pick up thousands of radio signals at a time, a radio tuner is necessary to tune in to a particular frequency (or frequency range).[5] This is typically done via a resonator (in its simplest form, a circuit with a capacitor and an inductor). The resonator is configured to resonate at a particular frequency (or frequency band), thus amplifying sine waves at that radio frequency, while ignoring other sine waves. Usually, either the inductor or the capacitor of the resonator is adjustable, allowing the user to change the frequency at which it resonates.[6]
[edit] In medicine
Radio frequency (RF) energy has been used in medical treatments for over 75 years[7] generally for minimally invasive surgeries and coagulation, including the treatment of sleep apnea.[8] Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses radio frequency waves to generate images of the human body. In a recent research made by American Heart Association published in Circulation magazine showed that denervation of kidney can diminish the arterial pressure during at least six months and until one year in the patients with persistent hypertension in spite of taking multiple medications to control it. The therapy is based on a catheter passing through the kidney to denervate the kidney by passing a brief blasts of radio waves directed to the nerves that surround the kidneys to burn the nervous fabric around the renal arteries. The objective is to destroy the nerves around the kidneys that control and filter the salt through the body and they can be hyperactive in the patients with hypertension.http://circ.ahajournals.org