
Twisted pair
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2007) 






25-pair color code Chart


Twisted pair cabling is a type of wiring in which two conductors of a single circuit are twisted together for the purposes of canceling out electromagnetic interference (EMI) from external sources; for instance, electromagnetic radiation from unshielded twisted pair (UTP) cables, and crosstalk between neighboring pairs. It was invented by Alexander Graham Bell.




Contents


1 Explanation
2 History
3 Unshielded twisted pair (UTP)
4 Cable shielding
5 Most common twisted-pair cables
6 Solid core cable vs stranded cable
7 Advantages
8 Disadvantages
9 Minor twisted pair variants
10 See also
11 References
12 External links




[edit] Explanation
In balanced pair operation, the two wires carry equal and opposite signals and the destination detects the difference between the two. This is known as differential mode transmission. Noise sources introduce signals into the wires by coupling of electric or magnetic fields and tend to couple to both wires equally. The noise thus produces a common-mode signal which is cancelled at the receiver when the difference signal is taken.
This method starts to fail when the noise source is close to the signal wires; the closer wire will couple with the noise more strongly and the common-mode rejection of the receiver will fail to eliminate it. This problem is especially apparent in telecommunication cables where pairs in the same cable lie next to each other for many miles. One pair can induce crosstalk in another and it is additive along the length of the cable. Twisting the pairs counters this effect as on each half twist the wire nearest to the noise-source is exchanged.
Providing the interfering source remains uniform, or nearly so, over the distance of a single twist, the induced noise will remain common-mode. Differential signaling also reduces electromagnetic radiation from the cable, along with the associated attenuation allowing for greater distance between exchanges.
The twist rate (also called pitch of the twist, usually defined in twists per meter) makes up part of the specification for a given type of cable. Where nearby pairs have equal twist rates, the same conductors of the different pairs may repeatedly lie next to each other, partially undoing the benefits of differential mode. For this reason it is commonly specified that, at least for cables containing small numbers of pairs, the twist rates must differ.[1]
In contrast to FTP (foiled twisted pair) and STP (shielded twisted pair) cabling, UTP (unshielded twisted pair) cable is not surrounded by any shielding. It is the primary wire type for telephone usage and is very common for computer networking, especially as patch cables or temporary network connections due to the high flexibility of the cables.
[edit] History




Wire transposition on top of pole


The earliest telephones used telegraph lines, or open-wire single-wire earth return circuits. In the 1880s electric trams were installed in many cities, which induced noise into these circuits. Lawsuits being unavailing, the telephone companies converted to balanced circuits, which had the incidental benefit of reducing attenuation, hence increasing range.
As electrical power distribution became more commonplace, this measure proved inadequate. Two wires, strung on either side of cross bars on utility poles, shared the route with electrical power lines. Within a few years, the growing use of electricity again brought an increase of interference, so engineers devised a method called wire transposition, to cancel out the interference.
In wire transposition, the wires exchange position once every several poles. In this way, the two wires would receive similar EMI from power lines. This represented an early implementation of twisting, with a twist rate of about four twists per kilometre, or six per mile. Such open-wire balanced lines with periodic transpositions still survive today in some rural areas.
Twisted pair cables were invented by Alexander Graham Bell in 1881.[2] By 1900, the entire American telephone line network was either twisted pair or open wire with transposition to guard against interference. Today, most of the millions of kilometres of twisted pairs in the world are outdoor landlines, owned by telephone companies, used for voice service, and only handled or even seen by telephone workers.
[edit] Unshielded twisted pair (UTP)




Unshielded twisted pair


UTP cables are found in many Ethernet networks and telephone systems. For indoor telephone applications, UTP is often grouped into sets of 25 pairs according to a standard 25-pair color code originally developed by AT&T Corporation. A typical subset of these colors (white/blue, blue/white, white/orange, orange/white) shows up in most UTP cables.
For urban outdoor telephone cables containing hundreds or thousands of pairs, the cable is divided into smaller but identical bundles. Each bundle consists of twisted pairs that have different twist rates. The bundles are in turn twisted together to make up the cable. Pairs having the same twist rate within the cable can still experience some degree of crosstalk. Wire pairs are selected carefully to minimize crosstalk within a large cable.




Unshielded twisted pair cable with different twist rates


UTP cable is also the most common cable used in computer networking. Modern Ethernet, the most common data networking standard, utilizes UTP cables. Twisted pair cabling is often used in data networks for short and medium length connections because of its relatively lower costs compared to optical fiber and coaxial cable.
UTP is also finding increasing use in video applications, primarily in security cameras. Many cameras include a UTP output with screw terminals; UTP cable bandwidth has improved to match the baseband of television signals. As UTP is a balanced transmission line, a balun is needed to connect to unbalanced equipment, for example any using BNC connectors and designed for coaxial cable.

[edit] Cable shielding
Main article: Electromagnetic shielding




ScTP, also known as FTP






STP cable format






S-STP, also known as S/FTP.






S/UTP cable format






S/STP cable format


Twisted pair cables are often shielded in an attempt to prevent electromagnetic interference. Because the shielding is made of metal, it may also serve as a ground. However, usually a shielded or a screened twisted pair cable has a special grounding wire added called a drain wire.
This shielding can be applied to individual pairs, or to the collection of pairs. When shielding is applied to the collection of pairs, this is referred to as screening. Shielding provides an electric conductive barrier to attenuate electromagnetic waves external to the shield and provides conduction path by which induced currents can be circulated and returned to the source, via ground reference connection.

Shielded twisted pair (STP or STP-A)
150 ohm STP shielded twisted pair cable is defined by the IBM Cabling System specifications and is used with token ring or FDDI networks. This type of shielding protects cable from external EMI from entering or exiting the cable and also protects neighboring pairs from crosstalk.


Screened twisted pair (ScTP or F/TP)
ScTP cabling offers an overall sheath shield across all of the pairs within the 100 Ohm[3] twisted pair cable. F/TP uses foil shielding instead of a braided screen. This type of shielding protects EMI from entering or exiting the cable.


Screened shielded twisted pair (S/STP or S/FTP)
S/STP (Screened Shielded Twisted Pair) or S/FTP (Screened Foiled Twisted Pair) cabling offer shielding between the pair sets and an overall sheath shield within the 100 Ohm twisted pair cable. This type of shielding protects EMI from entering or exiting the cable and also protects neighboring pairs from crosstalk.

S/STP cable[4] is both individually shielded (like STP cabling) and also has an outer metal shielding covering the entire group of shielded copper pairs (like S/UTP). This type of cabling offers the best protection from interference from external sources, and also eliminates alien crosstalk.[4]

Shielded foiled Twisted pair (SFTP)
SFTP is different with S/FTP, SFTP is a kind of cable which has Foil and shield together. Usually use for outdoor cables for better protection against electrical signals and physical effects.

Note that different vendors and authors use different terminology (i.e. STP has been used to denote both STP-A, S/STP, and S/UTP).[3] See below for the ISO/IEC attempt to internationally standardise the various designations.
Comparison of some old and new abbreviations, according to ISO/IEC 11801:


Old name
New name
cable screening
pair shielding


UTP
U/UTP
none
none


STP
U/FTP
none
foil


FTP
F/UTP
foil
none


S-STP
S/FTP
braiding
foil


S-FTP
SF/UTP
foil, braiding
none


SFTP

Foil
Shield


The code before the slash designates the shielding for the cable itself, while the code after the slash determines the shielding for the individual pairs:

TP = twisted pair
U = unshielded
F = foil shielding
S = braided shielding

[edit] Most common twisted-pair cables


Name
Type
Bandwidth
Applications
Notes


Level 1

0.4MHz
Telephone and modem lines
Not described in EIA/TIA recommmendations. Unsuitable for modern systems.[5]


Level 2

4MHz
Older terminal systems, e.g. IBM 3270
Not described in EIA/TIA recommmendations. Unsuitable for modern systems.[5]


Cat3
UTP[6]
16MHz[6]
10BASE-T and 100BASE-T4 Ethernet[6]
Described in EIA/TIA-568. Unsuitable for speeds above 16 Mbit/s. Now mainly for telephone cables[6]


Cat4
UTP[6]
20MHz[6]
16 Mbit/s[6] Token Ring
Not commonly used[6]


Cat5
UTP[6]
100MHz[6]
100BASE-TX & 1000BASE-T Ethernet[6]
Common in most current LANs[6]


Cat5e
UTP[6]
100MHz[6]
100BASE-TX & 1000BASE-T Ethernet[6]
Enhanced Cat5. Same construction as Cat5, but with better testing standards.


Cat6
UTP[6]
250MHz[6]
10GBASE-T Ethernet
Most commonly installed cable in Finland according to the 2002 standard. SFS-EN 50173-1


Cat6a

500MHz
10GBASE-T Ethernet
ISO/IEC 11801:2002 Amendment 2.


Class F
S/FTP[6]
600MHz[6]
Telephone, CCTV, 1000BASE-TX in the same cable. 10GBASE-T Ethernet.
Four pairs, S/FTP (shielded pairs, braid-screened cable). Development complete - ISO/IEC 11801 2nd Ed.


Class Fa

1000MHz
Telephone, CATV, 1000BASE-TX in the same cable. 10GBASE-T Ethernet.
Four pairs, S/FTP (shielded pairs, braid-screened cable). Development complete - ISO/IEC 11801 2nd Ed. Am. 2.


[edit] Solid core cable vs stranded cable
A solid core cable uses one solid wire per conductor and in a four pair cable there would be a total of eight solid wires.[6] Stranded conductor uses multiple wires wrapped around each other in each conductor and in a four pair with seven strands per conductor cable, there would be a total of 56 wires (2 per pair x 4 pairs x 7 strands).[6]
Solid core cable is supposed to be used for permanently installed runs. It is less flexible than stranded cable and is more prone to failure if repeatedly flexed. Stranded cable is used for fly leads at patch panel and for connections from wall-ports to end devices, as it resists cracking of the conductors.
Connectors need to be designed differently for solid core than for stranded. Use of a connector with the wrong cable type is likely to lead to unreliable cabling. Plugs designed for solid and stranded core are readily available, and some vendors even offer plugs designed for use with both types. The punch-down blocks on patch-panel and wall port jacks are designed for use with solid core cable.
[edit] Advantages

It is a thin, flexible cable that is easy to string between walls.
More lines can be run through the same wiring ducts.
UTP costs less per meter/foot than any other type of LAN cable.
Electrical noise going into or coming from the cable can be prevented.[7]
Cross-talk is minimized.[7]

[edit] Disadvantages

Twisted pairs susceptibility to electromagnetic interference greatly depends on the pair twisting schemes (usually patented by the manufacturers) staying intact during the installation. As a result, twisted pair cables usually have stringent requirements for maximum pulling tension as well as minimum bend radius. This relative fragility of twisted pair cables makes the installation practices an important part of ensuring the cables performance.[citation needed]


In video applications that send information across multiple parallel signal wires, twisted pair cabling can introduce signaling delays known as skew which results in subtle color defects and ghosting due to the image components not aligning correctly when recombined in the display device. The skew occurs because twisted pairs within the same cable often use a different number of twists per meter so as to prevent crosstalk between pairs with identical numbers of twists. The skew can be compensated by varying the length of pairs in the termination box, so as to introduce delay lines that take up the slack between shorter and longer pairs, though the precise lengths required are difficult to calculate and vary depending on the overall cable length.[citation needed]

[edit] Minor twisted pair variants

Loaded twisted pair
A twisted pair that has intentionally added inductance, formerly common practice on telecommunication lines. The added inductors are known as load coils and reduce attenuation for voiceband frequencies but increase it on higher frequencies. Load coils cause distortion in voiceband on very long lines.[8] In this context a line without load coils is referred to as an unloaded line.
Bonded twisted pair
A twisted pair variant in which the pairs are individually bonded to increase robustness of the cable. Pioneered by Belden, it means the electrical specifications of the cable are maintained despite rough handling.
Twisted ribbon cable
A variant of standard ribbon cable in which adjacent pairs of conductors are bonded and twisted together. The twisted pairs are then lightly bonded to each other in a ribbon format. Periodically along the ribbon there are short sections with no twisting to enable connectors and pcb headers to be terminated using the usual ribbon cable IDC techniques.

[edit] See also

Balanced line
Category 5 cable
Ethernet over twisted pair
Litz wire
Registered jack
TIA/EIA-568-B
Tip and ring
Copper wire and cable

[edit] References


^ "Crosstalk dependence on number of turns/inch for twisted pair versions of the endcap umbilical cable". http://www.hep.ph.ic.ac.uk/~dmray/pdffiles/TP_umbilical_studies.pdf.
^ US 244426, Bell, Alexander Graham, "Telephone-circuit", issued 1881. See also TIFF format scans for USPTO 00244426
^ a b Anitech Systems MP 4000 Manual
^ a b Grounding for Screened and Shielded Network Cabling - Siemon
^ a b "CCNA: Network Media Types". http://www.ciscopress.com/articles/article.asp?p=31276.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u "Comparison between CAT5, CAT5e, CAT6, CAT7 Cables". http://discountcablesusa.com/ethernet-cables100.html.
^ a b "Twisted Pair Testing". http://www.cirris.com/testing/twisted_pair/twist.html.
^ cisco.com: Understanding Line Impairments, visited 2012-06-04


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Twisted-pair cables



Telecommunications Virtual Museum
Independent comparative study UTP vs. STP for 10GBase-T









v
t
e


Unshielded and shielded twisted pair cabling standards






Categories



Level 1
Level 2
Cat 3
Cat 4
Cat 5
Cat 5e
Cat 6
Cat 6a
Class F











See also
TIA/EIA-568
Ethernet over twisted pair
Modular connector
Twisted pair
















v
t
e


Telecommunications






History



Beacons
Broadcasting
Communications satellites
Computer networks
Drums
Electrical telegraphs
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraphs
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phones
Optical telegraphy
Photophones
Radio
Radiotelephones
Smoke signals
Telegraphy
Telephones
The Telephone Cases
Television
Undersea telegraph lines
Videotelephony











Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Lee De Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Guglielmo Marconi
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Papin Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin








Transmission media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Telephone lines
Terrestrial microwave








Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Packet switched
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








Geographic







v
t
e


Telecommunications in Africa






Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Cte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
So Tom and Prncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe








States with limited
recognition



Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland








Dependencies and
other territories



Canary Islands/ Ceuta/ Melilla/ Plazas de soberana(Spain)
Madeira(Portugal)
Mayotte/ Runion(France)
Saint Helena/ Ascension Island/ Tristan da Cunha(United Kingdom)
Western Sahara










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Asia






Sovereign
states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
People's Republic of China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan








Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Europe






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria








Dependencies and
other territories



land
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard








Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Telecommunications in North America






Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States








Dependencies and
other territories



Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Navassa Island
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthlemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Oceania






Sovereign states



Australia
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu








Dependencies and
other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cook Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Niue
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Telecommunications in South America






Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela








Dependencies and
other territories



Aruba
Bonaire
Curaao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands











 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 19885/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 56377/1500000
Post-expand include size: 254792/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 160579/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/40
Expensive parser function count: 15/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:80506-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20121220203942 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Twisted_pair&oldid=526366276"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Communication circuitsVideo hardwareElectromagnetic compatibilityCablesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2007All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2012  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 