
Velocity
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
This article is about velocity in physics.  For other uses, see Velocity (disambiguation).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2011) 





Velocity









As a change of direction occurs while the cars turn on the curved track, their velocity is not constant.



Common symbol(s):
v


SI unit:
m / s




Classical mechanics


History of classical mechanics
Timeline of classical mechanics




Branches



Statics
Dynamics / Kinetics
Kinematics
Applied mechanics
Celestial mechanics
Continuum mechanics
Statistical mechanics









Formulations


Newtonian mechanics (Vectorial mechanics)
Analytical mechanics:

Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics










Fundamental concepts



Space
Time
Mass
Inertia
Velocity
Speed
Acceleration
Force
Momentum
Impulse
Torque / Moment / Couple
Angular momentum
Moment of inertia
Reference frame
Energy
Kinetic energy
Potential energy
Mechanical work
Mechanical power
Virtual work
D'Alembert's principle









Core topics



Rigid body
Rigid body dynamics
Euler's equations (rigid body dynamics)
Motion
Linear motion
Newton's laws of motion
Newton's law of universal gravitation
Euler's laws of motion
Equations of motion
Inertial frame of reference
Non-inertial reference frame
Fictitious force
Mechanics of planar particle motion
Displacement (vector)
Relative velocity
Friction
Simple harmonic motion
Harmonic oscillator
Vibration
Damping
Damping ratio



Rotational motion


Circular motion
Uniform circular motion
Non-uniform circular motion
Rotating reference frame
Centripetal force
Centrifugal force
Centrifugal force (rotating reference frame)
Reactive centrifugal force
Coriolis force
Pendulum
Tangential speed
Rotational speed
Angular acceleration
Angular velocity
Angular frequency
Angular displacement









Scientists



Galileo
Newton
Kepler
Horrocks
Halley
Euler
d'Alembert
Clairaut
Lagrange
Laplace
Hamilton
Poisson
Daniel Bernoulli
Johann Bernoulli
Cauchy










v
t
e





In kinematics, velocity is the rate of change of the position of an object, equivalent to a specification of its speed and direction of motion. Speed describes only how fast an object is moving, whereas velocity gives both how fast and in what direction the object is moving.[1] If a car is said to travel at 60km/h, its speed has been specified. However, if the car is said to move at 60km/h to the north, its velocity has now been specified. To have a constant velocity, an object must have a constant speed in a constant direction. Constant direction constrains the object to motion in a straight path (the object's path does not curve). Thus, a constant velocity means motion in a straight line at a constant speed. If there is a change in speed, direction, or both, then the object is said to have a changing velocity and is undergoing an acceleration. For example, a car moving at a constant 20 kilometres per hour in a circular path has a constant speed, but does not have a constant velocity because its direction changes. Hence, the car is considered to be undergoing an acceleration.
Velocity is a vector physical quantity; both magnitude and direction are required to define it. The scalar absolute value (magnitude) of velocity is called "speed", a quantity that is measured in metres per second (m/s or ms1) when using the SI (metric) system. For example, "5 metres per second" is a scalar (not a vector), whereas "5 metres per second east" is a vector. The rate of change of velocity (in m/s) as a function of time (in s) is "acceleration" (in m/s2  stated "metres per second per second"), which describes how an object's speed and direction of travel change at each point in time. In science a "deceleration" is called a "negative acceleration", for example: -2 m/s2.




Contents


1 Equation of motion
2 Relative velocity

2.1 Scalar velocities


3 Polar coordinates
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links




[edit] Equation of motion
Main article: Equation of motion
The average velocity  of an object moving through a displacement  during a time interval  is described by the formula:



The velocity vector v of an object that has positions x(t) at time t and x at time , can be computed as the derivative of position:



Velocity is also defined as rate of change of displacement. Average velocity magnitudes are always smaller than or equal to average speed of a given particle. Instantaneous velocity is always tangential to trajectory. Slope of tangent of position or displacement time graph is instantaneous velocity and its slope of chord is average velocity.
The equation for an object's velocity can be obtained mathematically by evaluating the integral of the equation for its acceleration beginning from some initial period time  to some point in time later .
The final velocity v of an object which starts with velocity u and then accelerates at constant acceleration a for a period of time  is:



The average velocity of an object undergoing constant acceleration is , where u is the initial velocity and v is the final velocity. To find the position, x, of such an accelerating object during a time interval, , then:



When only the object's initial velocity is known, the expression,



can be used.
This can be expanded to give the position at any time t in the following way:



These basic equations for final velocity and position can be combined to form an equation that is independent of time, also known as Torricelli's equation:



The above equations are valid for both Newtonian mechanics and special relativity. Where Newtonian mechanics and special relativity differ is in how different observers would describe the same situation. In particular, in Newtonian mechanics, all observers agree on the value of t and the transformation rules for position create a situation in which all non-accelerating observers would describe the acceleration of an object with the same values. Neither is true for special relativity. In other words only relative velocity can be calculated.
In Newtonian mechanics, the kinetic energy (energy of motion), , of a moving object is linear with both its mass and the square of its velocity:



The kinetic energy is a scalar quantity.
Escape velocity is the minimum velocity a body must have in order to escape from the gravitational field of the earth. To escape from the Earth's gravitational field an object must have greater kinetic energy than its gravitational potential energy. The value of the escape velocity from the Earth's surface is approximately 11100m/s.
[edit] Relative velocity
Main article: Relative velocity
Relative velocity is a measurement of velocity between two objects as determined in a single coordinate system. Relative velocity is fundamental in both classical and modern physics, since many systems in physics deal with the relative motion of two or more particles. In Newtonian mechanics, the relative velocity is independent of the chosen inertial reference frame. This is not the case anymore with special relativity in which velocities depend on the choice of reference frame.
If an object A is moving with velocity vector v and an object B with velocity vector w, then the velocity of object A relative to object B is defined as the difference of the two velocity vectors:



Similarly the relative velocity of object B moving with velocity w, relative to object A moving with velocity v is:



Usually the inertial frame is chosen in which the latter of the two mentioned objects is in rest.
[edit] Scalar velocities
In the one dimensional case,[2] the velocities are scalars and the equation is either:

, if the two objects are moving in opposite directions, or:
, if the two objects are moving in the same direction.

[edit] Polar coordinates
In polar coordinates, a two-dimensional velocity is described by a radial velocity, defined as the component of velocity away from or toward the origin (also known as velocity made good), and an angular velocity, which is the rate of rotation about the origin (with positive quantities representing counter-clockwise rotation and negative quantities representing clockwise rotation, in a right-handed coordinate system).
The radial and angular velocities can be derived from the Cartesian velocity and displacement vectors by decomposing the velocity vector into radial and transverse components. The transverse velocity is the component of velocity along a circle centered at the origin.



where

 is the transverse velocity
 is the radial velocity.

The magnitude of the radial velocity is the dot product of the velocity vector and the unit vector in the direction of the displacement.



where

 is displacement.

The magnitude of the transverse velocity is that of the cross product of the unit vector in the direction of the displacement and the velocity vector. It is also the product of the angular speed  and the magnitude of the displacement.



such that



Angular momentum in scalar form is the mass times the distance to the origin times the transverse velocity, or equivalently, the mass times the distance squared times the angular speed. The sign convention for angular momentum is the same as that for angular velocity.



where

 is mass


The expression  is known as moment of inertia. If forces are in the radial direction only with an inverse square dependence, as in the case of a gravitational orbit, angular momentum is constant, and transverse speed is inversely proportional to the distance, angular speed is inversely proportional to the distance squared, and the rate at which area is swept out is constant. These relations are known as Kepler's laws of planetary motion.
[edit] See also

Escape velocity
Four-velocity (relativistic version of velocity for Minkowski spacetime)
Group velocity
Hypervelocity
Kinematics
Phase velocity
Proper velocity (in relativity, using traveler time instead of observer time)
Rapidity (a version of velocity additive at relativistic speeds)
Relative velocity
Terminal velocity
Velocity vs. time graph

[edit] Notes


^ Wilson, Edwin Bidwell (1901). Vector analysis: a text-book for the use of students of mathematics and physics, founded upon the lectures of J. Willard Gibbs. pp.125. http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015000962285?urlappend=%3Bseq=149. This is the likely origin of the speed/velocity terminology in vector physics.
^ Basic principle


[edit] References

Robert Resnick and Jearl Walker, Fundamentals of Physics, Wiley; 7 Sub edition (June 16, 2004). ISBN 0-471-23231-9.

[edit] External links

Physicsclassroom.com, Speed and Velocity
Introduction to Mechanisms (Carnegie Mellon University)









v
t
e


Kinematics









 Integrate  Differentiate 











Displacement (Distance)
Velocity (Speed)
Acceleration
Jerk
Jounce











Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Velocity


 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 3207/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 44455/1500000
Post-expand include size: 57969/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 30929/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/40
Expensive parser function count: 1/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:20491903-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130126154700 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Velocity&oldid=534996759"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: MotionKinematicsVelocityConcepts in physicsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2011All articles needing additional references  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 