
Zipper
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
For other uses, see Zipper (disambiguation).
"Zipping" redirects here. For the racehorse, see Zipping (horse).





This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (November 2009) 






Nylon plastic zippers.


A zipper, zip, or zip fastener, is a commonly used device for binding the edges of an opening of fabric or other flexible material, as on a garment or a bag.[1] It is used in clothing (e.g., jackets and jeans), luggage and other bags, sporting goods, camping gear (e.g. tents and sleeping bags), and other items. It was invented by Gideon Sundbck around 1917 based on prior less effective fasteners, but many others have made improvements, leading to many different versions of the device.




Contents


1 Description
2 History
3 Types

3.1 Air and water tightness


4 Components
5 Manufacturing
6 Patents
7 Alternatives
8 See also
9 References
10 External links




[edit] Description
The bulk of a zipper/zip consists of two rows of protruding teeth which may be made to interdigitate, linking the rows,[2] carrying from tens to hundreds of specially shaped metal or plastic teeth. These teeth can be either individual or shaped from a continuous coil, and are also referred to as elements.[3] The slider, operated by hand, moves along the rows of teeth. Inside the slider is a Y-shaped channel that meshes together or separates the opposing rows of teeth, depending on the direction of the slider's movement. The word Zipper is onomatopoetic, because it was named for the sound the device makes when used, a high-pitched zip.
In many jackets and similar garments, the opening is closed entirely when the slider is at one of the ends of the tape. The mechanism allows for partial fastening where only some of the tape is fastened together, but various movements and pressures may move the slider around the tape. In many kinds of luggage, there are two sliders on the tape, mounted in opposite directions; the part of the zipper between them is unfastened. When the sliders are located at opposite ends of the tape, the zipper is fully unfastened; when the two sliders are located next to each other, which can be at any point along the tape, the zipper is fully closed.
Zippers may

increase or decrease the size of an opening to allow or restrict the passage of objects, as in the fly of trousers or in a pocket.
join or separate two ends or sides of a single garment, as in the front of a jacket, or on the front, back or side of a dress or skirt to facilitate dressing.
attach or detach a separable part of the garment to or from another, as in the conversion between trousers and shorts or the connection or disconnection of a hood and a coat.
decorate an item.

These variations are achieved by sewing one end of the zipper together, sewing both ends together, or allowing both ends of the zipper to fall completely apart.
A zipper costs relatively little, but if it fails, the garment may be unusable until the zipper is repaired or replacedwhich can be quite difficult and expensive. Problems often lie with the zipper slider; when it becomes worn it does not properly align and join the alternating teeth. If a zipper fails, it can either jam (i.e. get stuck) or partially break off.
[edit] History
Elias Howe, who invented the sewing machine, received a patent in 1851 for an "Automatic, Continuous Clothing Closure". Perhaps because of the success of his sewing machine, he did not try to seriously market it, missing recognition he might otherwise have received.[4]
Forty-two years later, Whitcomb Judson, who invented the pneumatic street railway, marketed a "Clasp Locker". The device was similar to Howe's patent, but actually served as a (more complicated) hook-and-eye shoe fastener. With the support of businessman Colonel Lewis Walker, Judson launched the Universal Fastener Company to manufacture the new device. The clasp locker had its public debut at the 1893 Chicago World's Fair and met with little commercial success.[4] Judson is credited with having invented the zipper because he was the first person to market it.
Gideon Sundbck, a Swedish-American electrical engineer, was hired to work for the Universal Fastener Company in St. Catharines, Ontario in 1906. He was also the president and CEO of Lightning Fastener Co.[5] Good technical skills and a marriage to the plant-manager's daughter Elvira Aronson led Sundbck to the position of head designer. After his wife's death in 1911, he devoted himself to the worktable, and by December 1913 had designed the modern zipper.[6]
Gideon Sundbck increased the number of fastening elements from four per inch (about one every 6.4mm) to ten or eleven (around every 2.5mm), introduced two facing rows of teeth that pulled into a single piece by the slider, and increased the opening for the teeth guided by the slider. The patent for the "Separable Fastener" was issued in 1917. Gideon Sundbck also created the manufacturing machine for the new device. The "S-L" or "scrapless" machine took a special Y-shaped wire and cut scoops from it, then punched the scoop dimple and nib, and clamped each scoop on a cloth tape to produce a continuous zipper chain. Within the first year of operation, Sundbck's machinery was producing a few hundred feet (around 100 meters) of fastener per day.[citation needed]In March of the same year, Mathieu Burri a Swiss inventor improved the design by adding a lock-in system attached to the last teeth, but his version never got into production due to conflicting patents.




Zipper slider brings together the two sides


The popular zipper name came from the B. F. Goodrich Company in 1923. B.F. Goodrich Company was founded by Benjamin Goodrich. He was a physician and industrialist, born in Ripley, New York, USA. He was a surgeon during the Civil War, who started his career when he opened a private practice in Jamestown, NY (1864).[7][8] The company opted to use Gideon Sundbck's fastener on a new type of rubber boots (or galoshes) and referred to it as the zipper, and the name stuck. The two chief uses of the zipper in its early years were for closing boots and tobacco pouches. It was almost twenty years before the fashion industry began seriously promoting the novel closure on garments.[4]
In the 1930s, a sales campaign began for children's clothing featuring zippers. The campaign praised zippers for promoting self-reliance in young children by making it possible for them to dress in self-help clothing. The zipper beat the button in 1937 in the "Battle of the Fly", after French fashion designers raved over zippers in men's trousers. Esquire declared the zipper the "Newest Tailoring Idea for Men" and among the zippered fly's many virtues was that it would exclude "The Possibility of Unintentional and Embarrassing Disarray."[citation needed]
The most recent innovation in the zipper's design was the introduction of models that could open on both ends, as on jackets. Today the zipper is by far the most widespread fastener, and is found on clothing, luggage, leather goods, and various other objects.[9]
[edit] Types




A coil zipper with its slider removed.



Coil zippers now form the bulk of sales of zippers worldwide. The slider runs on two coils on each side; the teeth are formed by the windings of the coils. Two basic types of coils are used: one with coils in spiral form, usually with a cord running inside the coils; the other with coils in ladder form, also called the Ruhrmann type. This second type is now used only in a few parts of the world, mainly in South Asia. Coil zippers are made of polyester coil and are thus also termed polyester zippers. Nylon was formerly used and though only polyester is used now, the type is still also termed a nylon zipper.
Invisible zippers have the teeth hidden behind a tape, so that the zipper is invisible. The tape's color matches the garment's, as does the slider's. This kind of a zipper is common in skirts and dresses. Invisible zippers are usually coil zippers. They are also seeing increased use by the military and emergency services because the appearance of a button down shirt can be maintained, while providing a quick and easy fastening system.
Metallic zippers are the classic zipper type, found mostly in jeans today. The teeth are not a coil, but are individual pieces of metal molded into shape and set on the zipper tape at regular intervals. Metal zippers are made in brass, aluminum and nickel, according to the metal used for teeth making. All these zippers are basically made from flat wire. A special type of metal zipper is made from pre-formed wire, usually brass but sometimes other metals too. Only a few companies in the world have the technology. This type of pre-formed metal zippers is mainly used in high grade jeans-wear, work-wear, etc., where high strength is required and zippers need to withstand tough washing.
Plastic-molded zippers are identical to metallic zippers, except that the teeth are plastic instead of metal. Metal zippers can be painted to match the surrounding fabric; plastic zippers can be made in any color of plastic. Plastic zippers mostly use polyacetal resin, though other thermoplastic polymers are used as well, such as polyethylene.
Open-ended zippers use a box and pin mechanism to lock the two sides of the zipper into place, often in jackets. Open-ended zippers can be of any of the above described types.
Closed-ended zippers are closed at both ends; they are often used in luggage.

[edit] Air and water tightness




Waterproof zipper on a diving dry suit. The exterior metal segments clamp the waterproof sheeting over the concealed zipper teeth. The zipper teeth are not visible in this image (obscured by the edges of the waterproof sheet).


Airtight zippers were first developed by NASA for making high-altitude pressure suits and later space suits, capable of retaining air pressure inside the suit in the vacuum of space.
The airtight zipper is built like a standard toothed zipper, but with a waterproof sheeting (which is made of fabric-reinforced polyethylene and is bonded to the rest of the suit) wrapped around the outside of each row of zipper teeth. The sheeting is crimped in place around each zipper tooth by using a C-shaped metal clip on the outside. (These externally-visible opposing rows of clips are the metal runners on which the slider moves.) When the zipper is closed, the two facing sides of the plastic sheeting are squeezed tightly against one another (between the C-shaped clips) both above and below the zipper teeth, forming a double seal.[10]
This double-mated surface is good at retaining both vacuum and pressure, but the fit must be very tight, to press the surfaces together firmly. Consequently these zippers are typically very stiff when zipped shut and have minimal flex or stretch. They are hard to open and close because the zipper anvil must bend apart teeth that are being held under tension. They can also be derailed (and damage the sealing surfaces) if the teeth are misaligned while straining to pull the zipper shut.
These zippers are very common where airtight or watertight seals are needed, such as on scuba diving dry suits, ocean survival suits, and hazmat suits.
A less common water-resistant zipper is similar in construction to a standard toothed zipper, but includes a molded plastic ridge seal similar to the mating surfaces on a ziploc bag. Such a zipper is easier to open and close than a clipped version, and the slider has a gap above the zipper teeth for separating the ridge seal. This seal is structurally weak against internal pressure, and can be separated by pressure within the sealed container pushing outward on the ridges, which will simply flex and spread apart, potentially allowing air or liquid entry through the spread-open ridges. Ridge-sealed zippers are sometimes seen on lower cost surface dry suits.
[edit] Components







Components of a zipper




The components of a zipper are:

top tape extension
top stop
slider
pull tab
tape
chain width
bottom stop
bottom tape extension
single tape width
insertion pin boll
retainer box
reinforcement film





[edit] Manufacturing
Manufacturers of zippers include YKK Group, Talon Zipper, Optilon and Tex Corp.
In 2003, Forbes reported [11] that although the zipper market in the 1960s was dominated by two major companies (Talon Zipper (USA) and Optilon (Germany)), Japanese manufacturer YKK Group grew to become the industry giant by the 1980s. As of 2003[update], YKK held 45% of the world market share, followed by Optilon (8%) and Talon (7%).
In 2005, The Guardian reported that China had 80% of the international market. Most of them are made in Qiaotou, Yongjia County.[12]
[edit] Patents











































25 November 1851 U.S. Patent 8,540: "Improvement in Fastening for Garments"
29 August 1893 U.S. Patent 504,037: "Shoe fastening"
29 August 1893 U.S. Patent 504,038: "Clasp Locker or Unlocker for Shoes"[13]
31 March 1896 U.S. Patent 557,207: "Fastening for Shoes"
31 March 1896 U.S. Patent 557,208: "Clasp-Locker for Shoes"
29 April 1913 U.S. Patent 1,060,378: "Separable fastener" (Gideon Sundback)
20 March 1917 U.S. Patent 1,219,881: "Separable fastener" (Gideon Sundback)
22 December 1936 U.S. Patent 2,065,250: "Slider"

[edit] Alternatives

Brooch
Buckle
Button
Safety pin
Shoelaces
Snap fasteners (also named poppers and press studs)
Velcro

[edit] See also

Zipper storage bag

[edit] References

Henry Petroski: The Evolution of Useful Things (1992); ISBN 0-679-74039-2
Robert Friedel: Zipper: An Exploration in Novelty (W. W. Norton and Company: New York, 1996); ISBN 0-393-31365-4


^ zipper. (2009). In Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. Retrieved from http://www.credoreference.com/entry/ebconcise/zipper
^ zipper. (2007). In Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary. Retrieved from http://www.credoreference.com/entry/ehsdorland/zipper
^ "YKK Fastening Products Group". Ykkfastening.com. Archived from the original on 2010-06-17. http://web.archive.org/web/20100617014018/http://www.ykkfastening.com/global/products/zs/structure.html. Retrieved 2011-07-14.
^ a b c "Zipper History". AnsunMultitech. http://www.ansun.com/history.html. Retrieved 2012-06-22.
^ SUNDBACK, (Otto Frederick) Gideon, 1880-1954. (2008). In A Biographical Dictionary of People in Engineering: From Earliest Records to 2000. Retrieved from http://www.credoreference.com/entry/purduepe/sundback_otto_frederick_gideon_1880_1954
^ Friedel, Robert (1996). Zipper: An Exploration in Novelty. W. W. Norton & Company. p.94. ISBN0-393-31365-4.
^ Goodrich, Benjamin F(ranklin) (1841  1888). (2005). In The Crystal Reference Encyclopedia. Retrieved from http://www.credoreference.com/entry/cre/goodrich_benjamin_f_ranklin_1841_1888
^ http://www.csmonitor.com/Innovation/Pioneers/2012/0424/Gideon-Sundback-At-first-the-world-shunned-the-zipper
^ Mary Bellis (2010-06-16). "History of the zipper". About.com Inventors. http://inventors.about.com/library/weekly/aa082497.htm. Retrieved 2011-07-14.
^ Drysuits: Zippers, Seals, Valves and Maintenance, NJScuba.net. Illustrated dissection of a dry-suit zipper.
^ Benjamin Fulford (2003-11-24). "Zipping Up the World". Forbes.com. http://www.forbes.com/global/2003/1124/089.html. Retrieved 2012-04-24.
^ Jonathan Watts (2005-05-25). "The tiger's teeth". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2005/may/25/china.g2. Retrieved 2012-04-24.
^ Ikenson, Ben. Patents: Ingenious Inventions: How They Work and How They Came to Be. New York: Black Dog & Leventhal Publishers, 2004.

[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Zippers



How Zippers Work by S. M. Blinder, the Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
The History of the Zipper.
An easy, fast way to fix a zipper. Repair without cost.









v
t
e


Sewing






Techniques



Basting
Cut
Darning
Dart
Embellishment
Fabric tube turning
Facing
Floating canvas
Gather
Godet
Gore
Gusset
Hem
Heirloom sewing
Lining
Pleat
Ruffle
Shirring
Style line















Stitches



Backstitch
Bar tack
Blanket
Blind stitch
Buttonhole
Catch stitch
Chain stitch
Cross-stitch
Embroidery stitch
Hemstitch
List of sewing stitches
Lockstitch
Overlock
Pad stitch
Pick stitch
Running
Sashiko
Tack
Topstitch
Zigzag








Seams



Armscye
Felled seam
Seam allowance








Notions and trims



Bias tape
Elastomer (Elastic)
Eyelet
Grommet
Interfacing
Notions
Passementerie
Piping
Rickrack
Self-fabric
Soutache
Trim
Twill tape
Wrights








Closures



Buckle
Button
Buttonhole
Fly
Frog
Hook-and-eye
Placket
Shank
Snap
Velcro
Zipper








Materials



Bias
Yarn / Thread
Selvage
Textiles / Fabrics








Tools



Bobbin
Dress form
Needle threader
Pin
Pincushion
Pinking shears
Scissors
Seam ripper
Sewing needle
Stitching awl
Tailor's ham
Tape measure
Thimble
Tracing paper
Tracing wheel








Trades and suppliers



Cloth merchant
Draper
Dressmaker
Haberdasher
Mercer / Mercery
Sewing occupations
Tailor








Sewing machine
manufacturers



Barthlemy Thimonnier
Bernina
Brother Industries
Elias Howe
Frister & Rossmann
Janome
Jones Sewing Machine Company
Merrow
New Home
Pfaff
Sewmor
Singer
Tapemaster
Viking / Husqvarna
White








Patterns



Butterick
Clothkits
McCall's
Simplicity











Glossary of sewing terms
















v
t
e


Clothing






Materials



Cotton
Fur
Leather
Linen
Nylon
Polyester
Rayon
Silk
Spandex
Wool








Tops



Blouse
Crop top
Dress shirt
Halterneck
Henley shirt
Hoodie
Jersey
Guernsey
Poet shirt
Polo shirt
Shirt
Sleeveless shirt
Sweater
Sweater vest
T-shirt
Tube top
Turtleneck
Twinset








Trousers or pants



Bell-bottoms
Bermuda shorts
Bondage pants
Capri pants
Cargo pants
Culottes
Cycling shorts
Dress pants
Jeans
Jodhpurs
Overall
Parachute pants
Phat pants
Shorts
Sweatpants
Windpants
Yoga pants








Skirts



A-line skirt
Ballerina skirt
Denim skirt
Fustanella
Hobble skirt
Job skirt
Leather skirt
Kilt
Men's skirts
Microskirt
Miniskirt
Pencil skirt
Poodle skirt
Prairie skirt
Rah-rah skirt
Sarong
Skort
Slip
Train
Wrap








Dresses



Ball gown
Cocktail dress
Dbutante dress
Evening gown
Gown
Jumper dress
Little black dress
Petticoat
Sari
Shirtdress
Sundress
Tea gown
Wedding dress
Wrap dress








Suits and uniforms



Academic dress
Black tie
Boubou
Clerical clothing
Court dress
Dashiki suit
Gymslip
Jumpsuit
Kasaya
Lab coat
Lounge suit
Mao suit
Morning dress
Pantsuit
Red Sea rig
Romper suit
Scrubs
Stroller
Tangzhuang
Tuxedo
White tie








Outerwear



Abaya
Academic gown
Anorak
Apron
Blazer
Cagoule
Cloak
Coat
Duffle coat
Duster
Frock coat
Goggle jacket
Greatcoat
Hoodie
Jacket
Leather jacket
Mess jacket
Opera coat
Overcoat
Pea coat
Poncho
Raincoat
Redingote
Robe
Shawl
Shrug
Ski suit
Sleeved blanket
Sport coat
Top coat
Trench coat
Vest
Waistcoat
Windbreaker








Underwear



Boxer briefs (tight)
Boxer shorts (loose)
Brassiere
Briefs
Bustle
Camisole
Compression sportswear
Corselet
Corset
Diaper
Dickey
Lingerie
Loincloth
Long underwear
Open drawers
Panties
Teddy
Temple garment
Trunks
Undershirt
Izaar








Accessories



Ascot tie
Belly chain
Belt
Bolo tie
Bow tie
Chaps
Coin purse
Cufflink
Cummerbund
Pocket watch
Earring
Gaiters
Gloves
Hairpin
Handbag
Muff (handwarmer)
Necklace
Necktie
Scarf
Shoe buckle
Sunglasses
Suspenders








Footwear



Stocking
Tights
Leg warmer
Leggings
Athletic shoe
Balgha
Boot
Court shoe
Dress shoe
Flip-flops
Hosiery
Sandal
Shoe
Slipper
Sock








Headwear



Balaclava
Beret
Bonnet
Cap
Crown
Deely bobber
Fascinator
Fillet
Hairnet
Hat
Headband
Headscarf
Helmet
Hood
Keffiyeh
Kerchief
Mask
Snood
Tiara
Turban
Ushanka
Veil
Visor
Wig








Nightwear



Babydoll
Blanket sleeper
Negligee
Nightcap
Nightgown
Nightshirt
Peignoir
Pajamas








Swimwear



Bikini
Boardshorts
One-piece
Rash guard
Square leg suit
Swim briefs
Swim cap
Swim diaper
Swim trunks
Wetsuit








Clothing parts



Back closure
Belt hook
Buckle
Bustline
Button
Buttonhole
Collar
Cuff
Elastic
Fly
Hemline
Hook-and-eye
Lapel
Neckline
Pocket
Revers
Shoulder pad
Shoulder strap
Sleeve
Snap
Strap
Velcro
Waistline
Yoke
Zipper








National costume



Albanian dress
Abaya
Aboyne dress
o b ba
o di
o t thn
Batik
Baro't saya & Barong Tagalog
Bunad
jbningurinn
Cheongsam (Qpo)
Dashiki
Deel
Dhoti
Dirndl
Djellaba
Fustanella
Gkti
Gho & Kira
Han Chinese clothing
Hanbok
Highland dress
Jellabiya
Jilbb
Kebaya
Kente cloth
Kilt
Kimono
Lederhosen
Sampot
Sarafan
Sari
Sarong
Shalwar kameez
Sherwani
Thawb








Historical garments



Banyan
Bedgown
Bodice
Braccae
Breeches
Breeching
Brunswick
Caraco
Chemise
Cravat
Chiton
Chlamys
Close-bodied gown
Doublet
Exomis
Farthingale
Frock
Himation
Hose
Houppelande
Jerkin
Justacorps
Knickerbockers
Palla
Peplos
Polonaise
Sack-back gown
Smock-frock
Stola
Toga
Tunic








History and surveys



Africa
Ancient Egypt
Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
Ancient world
Anglo-Saxon
Biblical clothing
Byzantine
Early Medieval Europe
Han Chinese
History of clothing and textiles
History of Western fashion series (1100s2000s)
Sumptuary law
Timeline of clothing and textiles technology
Vietnam
Women wearing pants








See also



Adaptive clothing
Clothing terminology
Costume
Dress code
Fashion
Formal wear
Ironing
Laundry
Locking clothing
Maternity clothing
Reversible garment









 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 6700/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 34101/1500000
Post-expand include size: 96799/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 37604/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/40
Expensive parser function count: 6/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:302218-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130127064535 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zipper&oldid=534357152"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Textile closuresAmerican inventions1913 introductionsSwedish inventionsHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2009All articles lacking in-text citationsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2012Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2003All articles containing potentially dated statementsUse dmy dates from August 2011  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 