
Gravitation
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 
(Redirected from Gravitational)
 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
This article is about the natural phenomenon.  For other uses, see Gravitation (disambiguation).
"Gravity" redirects here. For other uses, see Gravity (disambiguation).
"Law of Gravity" and "Laws of Gravity" redirect here. For other uses, see Law of Gravity (disambiguation).



Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player.
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser.


Hammer and Feather Drop - Apollo 15 astronaut David Scott on the Moon recreating Galileo's famous gravity experiment. (1.38 MB, ogg/Theora format).


Gravitation, or gravity, is the natural phenomenon by which physical bodies appear to attract each other with a force proportional to their masses. It is most commonly experienced as the agent that gives weight to objects with mass and causes them to fall to the ground when dropped. The phenomenon of gravitation itself, however, is a byproduct of a more fundamental phenomenon described by general relativity, which suggests that spacetime is curved according to the presence of matter through a yet-to-be discovered mechanism.
Gravitation is one of the four fundamental interactions of nature, along with electromagnetism, and the nuclear strong force and weak force. In modern physics, the phenomenon of gravitation is most accurately described by the general theory of relativity by Einstein, in which the phenomenon itself is a consequence of the curvature of spacetime governing the motion of inertial objects. The simpler Newton's law of universal gravitation provides an accurate approximation for most physical situations including calculations as critical as spacecraft trajectory.
From a cosmological perspective, gravitation causes dispersed matter to coalesce, and coalesced matter to remain intact, thus accounting for the existence of planets, stars, galaxies and most of the macroscopic objects in the universe. It is responsible for keeping the Earth and the other planets in their orbits around the Sun; for keeping the Moon in its orbit around the Earth; for the formation of tides; for natural convection, by which fluid flow occurs under the influence of a density gradient and gravity; for heating the interiors of forming stars and planets to very high temperatures; and for various other phenomena observed on Earth and throughout the universe.




Contents


1 History of gravitational theory

1.1 Scientific revolution
1.2 Newton's theory of gravitation
1.3 Equivalence principle
1.4 General relativity
1.5 Gravity and quantum mechanics


2 Specifics

2.1 Earth's gravity
2.2 Equations for a falling body near the surface of the Earth
2.3 Gravity and astronomy
2.4 Gravitational radiation
2.5 Speed of gravity


3 Anomalies and discrepancies
4 Alternative theories

4.1 Historical alternative theories
4.2 Recent alternative theories


5 See also
6 Notes
7 Footnotes
8 References
9 Further reading




 History of gravitational theory
Main article: History of gravitational theory


Classical mechanics


History of classical mechanics
Timeline of classical mechanics




Branches



Statics
Dynamics / Kinetics
Kinematics
Applied mechanics
Celestial mechanics
Continuum mechanics
Statistical mechanics









Formulations


Newtonian mechanics (Vectorial mechanics)
Analytical mechanics:

Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics










Fundamental concepts



Space
Time
Mass
Inertia
Velocity
Speed
Acceleration
Force
Momentum
Impulse
Torque / Moment / Couple
Angular momentum
Moment of inertia
Reference frame
Energy
Kinetic energy
Potential energy
Mechanical work
Mechanical power
Virtual work
D'Alembert's principle









Core topics



Rigid body
Rigid body dynamics
Euler's equations (rigid body dynamics)
Motion
Linear motion
Newton's laws of motion
Newton's law of universal gravitation
Euler's laws of motion
Equations of motion
Inertial frame of reference
Non-inertial reference frame
Fictitious force
Mechanics of planar particle motion
Displacement (vector)
Relative velocity
Friction
Simple harmonic motion
Harmonic oscillator
Vibration
Damping
Damping ratio



Rotational motion


Circular motion
Uniform circular motion
Non-uniform circular motion
Rotating reference frame
Centripetal force
Centrifugal force
Centrifugal force (rotating reference frame)
Reactive centrifugal force
Coriolis force
Pendulum
Tangential speed
Rotational speed
Angular acceleration
Angular velocity
Angular frequency
Angular displacement









Scientists



Galileo
Newton
Kepler
Horrocks
Halley
Euler
d'Alembert
Clairaut
Lagrange
Laplace
Hamilton
Poisson
Daniel Bernoulli
Johann Bernoulli
Cauchy










v
t
e





 Scientific revolution
Modern work on gravitational theory began with the work of Galileo Galilei in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. In his famous (though possibly apocryphal[1]) experiment dropping balls from the Tower of Pisa, and later with careful measurements of balls rolling down inclines, Galileo showed that gravitation accelerates all objects at the same rate. This was a major departure from Aristotle's belief that heavier objects accelerate faster.[2] Galileo correctly postulated air resistance as the reason that lighter objects may fall more slowly in an atmosphere. Galileo's work set the stage for the formulation of Newton's theory of gravity.
 Newton's theory of gravitation
Main article: Newton's law of universal gravitation




Sir Isaac Newton, an English physicist who lived from 1642 to 1727


In 1687, English mathematician Sir Isaac Newton published Principia, which hypothesizes the inverse-square law of universal gravitation. In his own words, I deduced that the forces which keep the planets in their orbs must [be] reciprocally as the squares of their distances from the centers about which they revolve: and thereby compared the force requisite to keep the Moon in her Orb with the force of gravity at the surface of the Earth; and found them answer pretty nearly.[3]
Newton's theory enjoyed its greatest success when it was used to predict the existence of Neptune based on motions of Uranus that could not be accounted for by the actions of the other planets. Calculations by both John Couch Adams and Urbain Le Verrier predicted the general position of the planet, and Le Verrier's calculations are what led Johann Gottfried Galle to the discovery of Neptune.
A discrepancy in Mercury's orbit pointed out flaws in Newton's theory. By the end of the 19th century, it was known that its orbit showed slight perturbations that could not be accounted for entirely under Newton's theory, but all searches for another perturbing body (such as a planet orbiting the Sun even closer than Mercury) had been fruitless. The issue was resolved in 1915 by Albert Einstein's new theory of general relativity, which accounted for the small discrepancy in Mercury's orbit.
Although Newton's theory has been superseded, most modern non-relativistic gravitational calculations are still made using Newton's theory because it is a much simpler theory to work with than general relativity, and gives sufficiently accurate results for most applications involving sufficiently small masses, speeds and energies.
 Equivalence principle
The equivalence principle, explored by a succession of researchers including Galileo, Lornd Etvs, and Einstein, expresses the idea that all objects fall in the same way. The simplest way to test the weak equivalence principle is to drop two objects of different masses or compositions in a vacuum, and see if they hit the ground at the same time. These experiments demonstrate that all objects fall at the same rate when friction (including air resistance) is negligible. More sophisticated tests use a torsion balance of a type invented by Etvs. Satellite experiments, for example STEP, are planned for more accurate experiments in space.[4]
Formulations of the equivalence principle include:

The weak equivalence principle: The trajectory of a point mass in a gravitational field depends only on its initial position and velocity, and is independent of its composition.[5]
The Einsteinian equivalence principle: The outcome of any local non-gravitational experiment in a freely falling laboratory is independent of the velocity of the laboratory and its location in spacetime.[6]
The strong equivalence principle requiring both of the above.

 General relativity
See also: Introduction to general relativity




Two-dimensional analogy of spacetime distortion generated by the mass of an object. Matter changes the geometry of spacetime, this (curved) geometry being interpreted as gravity. White lines do not represent the curvature of space but instead represent the coordinate system imposed on the curved spacetime, which would be rectilinear in a flat spacetime.




General relativity





Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources




Fundamental concepts
Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line Riemannian geometry






Phenomena
Kepler problem Lenses Waves
Frame-dragging Geodetic effect
Event horizon Singularity
Black hole






Equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
HamiltonJacobiEinstein equation






Advanced theories
KaluzaKlein
Quantum gravity






Solutions
Schwarzschild
ReissnerNordstrm Gdel
Kerr KerrNewman
Kasner Taub-NUT Milne RobertsonWalker
pp-wave van Stockum dust






Scientists
Einstein Lorentz Hilbert Poincare Schwarzschild Sitter Reissner Nordstrm Weyl Eddington Friedman Milne Zwicky Lematre Gdel Wheeler Robertson Bardeen Walker Kerr Chandrasekhar Ehlers Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Stockum Taub Newman Thorne
others






Spacetime
Spacetime
Minkowski spacetime
Spacetime diagrams
Spacetime in General relativity







v
t
e





In general relativity, the effects of gravitation are ascribed to spacetime curvature instead of a force. The starting point for general relativity is the equivalence principle, which equates free fall with inertial motion, and describes free-falling inertial objects as being accelerated relative to non-inertial observers on the ground.[7][8] In Newtonian physics, however, no such acceleration can occur unless at least one of the objects is being operated on by a force.
Einstein proposed that spacetime is curved by matter, and that free-falling objects are moving along locally straight paths in curved spacetime. These straight paths are called geodesics. Like Newton's first law of motion, Einstein's theory states that if a force is applied on an object, it would deviate from a geodesic. For instance, we are no longer following geodesics while standing because the mechanical resistance of the Earth exerts an upward force on us, and we are non-inertial on the ground as a result. This explains why moving along the geodesics in spacetime is considered inertial.
Einstein discovered the field equations of general relativity, which relate the presence of matter and the curvature of spacetime and are named after him. The Einstein field equations are a set of 10 simultaneous, non-linear, differential equations. The solutions of the field equations are the components of the metric tensor of spacetime. A metric tensor describes a geometry of spacetime. The geodesic paths for a spacetime are calculated from the metric tensor.
Notable solutions of the Einstein field equations include:

The Schwarzschild solution, which describes spacetime surrounding a spherically symmetric non-rotating uncharged massive object. For compact enough objects, this solution generated a black hole with a central singularity. For radial distances from the center which are much greater than the Schwarzschild radius, the accelerations predicted by the Schwarzschild solution are practically identical to those predicted by Newton's theory of gravity.
The Reissner-Nordstrm solution, in which the central object has an electrical charge. For charges with a geometrized length which are less than the geometrized length of the mass of the object, this solution produces black holes with two event horizons.
The Kerr solution for rotating massive objects. This solution also produces black holes with multiple event horizons.
The Kerr-Newman solution for charged, rotating massive objects. This solution also produces black holes with multiple event horizons.
The cosmological Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker solution, which predicts the expansion of the universe.

The tests of general relativity included the following:[9]

General relativity accounts for the anomalous perihelion precession of Mercury.2
The prediction that time runs slower at lower potentials has been confirmed by the PoundRebka experiment, the HafeleKeating experiment, and the GPS.
The prediction of the deflection of light was first confirmed by Arthur Stanley Eddington from his observations during the Solar eclipse of May 29, 1919.[10][11] Eddington measured starlight deflections twice those predicted by Newtonian corpuscular theory, in accordance with the predictions of general relativity. However, his interpretation of the results was later disputed.[12] More recent tests using radio interferometric measurements of quasars passing behind the Sun have more accurately and consistently confirmed the deflection of light to the degree predicted by general relativity.[13] See also gravitational lens.
The time delay of light passing close to a massive object was first identified by Irwin I. Shapiro in 1964 in interplanetary spacecraft signals.
Gravitational radiation has been indirectly confirmed through studies of binary pulsars.
Alexander Friedmann in 1922 found that Einstein equations have non-stationary solutions (even in the presence of the cosmological constant). In 1927 Georges Lematre showed that static solutions of the Einstein equations, which are possible in the presence of the cosmological constant, are unstable, and therefore the static universe envisioned by Einstein could not exist. Later, in 1931, Einstein himself agreed with the results of Friedmann and Lematre. Thus general relativity predicted that the Universe had to be non-staticit had to either expand or contract. The expansion of the universe discovered by Edwin Hubble in 1929 confirmed this prediction.[14]
The theory's prediction of frame dragging was consistent with the recent Gravity Probe B results.[15]
General relativity predicts that light should lose its energy when travelling away from the massive bodies. The group of Radek Wojtak of the Niels Bohr Institute at the University of Copenhagen collected data from 8000 galaxy clusters and found that the light coming from the cluster centers tended to be red-shifted compared to the cluster edges, confirming the energy loss due to gravity.[16]

 Gravity and quantum mechanics
Main articles: Graviton and Quantum gravity
In the decades after the discovery of general relativity it was realized that general relativity is incompatible with quantum mechanics.[17] It is possible to describe gravity in the framework of quantum field theory like the other fundamental forces, such that the attractive force of gravity arises due to exchange of virtual gravitons, in the same way as the electromagnetic force arises from exchange of virtual photons.[18][19] This reproduces general relativity in the classical limit. However, this approach fails at short distances of the order of the Planck length,[17] where a more complete theory of quantum gravity (or a new approach to quantum mechanics) is required.
 Specifics
 Earth's gravity
Main article: Earth's gravity
Every planetary body (including the Earth) is surrounded by its own gravitational field, which exerts an attractive force on all objects. Assuming a spherically symmetrical planet, the strength of this field at any given point is proportional to the planetary body's mass and inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the center of the body.
The strength of the gravitational field is numerically equal to the acceleration of objects under its influence, and its value at the Earth's surface, denoted g, is approximately expressed below as the standard average.
g = 9.81m/s2 = 32.2ft/s2
This means that, ignoring air resistance, an object falling freely near the Earth's surface increases its velocity by 9.81m/s (32.2ft/s or 22mph) for each second of its descent. Thus, an object starting from rest will attain a velocity of 9.81m/s (32.2ft/s) after one second, 19.62m/s (64.4ft/s) after two seconds, and so on, adding 9.81m/s (32.2ft/s) to each resulting velocity. Also, again ignoring air resistance, any and all objects, when dropped from the same height, will hit the ground at the same time.




If an object with comparable mass to that of the Earth were to fall towards it, then the corresponding acceleration of the Earth really would be observable.


According to Newton's 3rd Law, the Earth itself experiences a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to that which it exerts on a falling object. This means that the Earth also accelerates towards the object until they collide. Because the mass of the Earth is huge, however, the acceleration imparted to the Earth by this opposite force is negligible in comparison to the object's. If the object doesn't bounce after it has collided with the Earth, each of them then exerts a repulsive contact force on the other which effectively balances the attractive force of gravity and prevents further acceleration.
 Equations for a falling body near the surface of the Earth




Ball falling freely under gravity. See text for description.


Main article: Equations for a falling body
Under an assumption of constant gravity, Newton's law of universal gravitation simplifies to F = mg, where m is the mass of the body and g is a constant vector with an average magnitude of 9.81m/s2. The acceleration due to gravity is equal to this g. An initially stationary object which is allowed to fall freely under gravity drops a distance which is proportional to the square of the elapsed time. The image on the right, spanning half a second, was captured with a stroboscopic flash at 20 flashes per second. During the first 120 of a second the ball drops one unit of distance (here, a unit is about 12mm); by 220 it has dropped at total of 4 units; by 320, 9 units and so on.
Under the same constant gravity assumptions, the potential energy, Ep, of a body at height h is given by Ep = mgh (or Ep = Wh, with W meaning weight). This expression is valid only over small distances h from the surface of the Earth. Similarly, the expression  for the maximum height reached by a vertically projected body with initial velocity v is useful for small heights and small initial velocities only.
 Gravity and astronomy
The discovery and application of Newton's law of gravity accounts for the detailed information we have about the planets in our solar system, the mass of the Sun, the distance to stars, quasars and even the theory of dark matter. Although we have not traveled to all the planets nor to the Sun, we know their masses. These masses are obtained by applying the laws of gravity to the measured characteristics of the orbit. In space an object maintains its orbit because of the force of gravity acting upon it. Planets orbit stars, stars orbit Galactic Centers, galaxies orbit a center of mass in clusters, and clusters orbit in superclusters. The force of gravity exerted on one object by another is directly proportional to the product of those objects' masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
 Gravitational radiation
Main article: Gravitational wave
In general relativity, gravitational radiation is generated in situations where the curvature of spacetime is oscillating, such as is the case with co-orbiting objects. The gravitational radiation emitted by the Solar System is far too small to measure. However, gravitational radiation has been indirectly observed as an energy loss over time in binary pulsar systems such as PSR B1913+16. It is believed that neutron star mergers and black hole formation may create detectable amounts of gravitational radiation. Gravitational radiation observatories such as the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) have been created to study the problem. No confirmed detections have been made of this hypothetical radiation, but as the science behind LIGO is refined and as the instruments themselves are endowed with greater sensitivity over the next decade, this may change.
 Speed of gravity
In December 2012, a research team in China announced that it had produced findings which seem to prove that the speed of gravity is equal to the speed of light. The team's findings were due to be released in a journal in 2013.[20]
 Anomalies and discrepancies
There are some observations that are not adequately accounted for, which may point to the need for better theories of gravity or perhaps be explained in other ways.


Rotation curve of a typical spiral galaxy: predicted (A) and observed (B). The discrepancy between the curves is attributed to dark matter.



Extra fast stars: Stars in galaxies follow a distribution of velocities where stars on the outskirts are moving faster than they should according to the observed distributions of normal matter. Galaxies within galaxy clusters show a similar pattern. Dark matter, which would interact gravitationally but not electromagnetically, would account for the discrepancy. Various modifications to Newtonian dynamics have also been proposed.


Flyby anomaly: Various spacecraft have experienced greater acceleration than expected during gravity assist maneuvers.


Accelerating expansion: The metric expansion of space seems to be speeding up. Dark energy has been proposed to explain this. A recent alternative explanation is that the geometry of space is not homogeneous (due to clusters of galaxies) and that when the data are reinterpreted to take this into account, the expansion is not speeding up after all,[21] however this conclusion is disputed.[22]


Anomalous increase of the astronomical unit: Recent measurements indicate that planetary orbits are widening faster than if this were solely through the sun losing mass by radiating energy.


Extra energetic photons: Photons travelling through galaxy clusters should gain energy and then lose it again on the way out. The accelerating expansion of the universe should stop the photons returning all the energy, but even taking this into account photons from the cosmic microwave background radiation gain twice as much energy as expected. This may indicate that gravity falls off faster than inverse-squared at certain distance scales.[23]


Dark flow: Surveys of galaxy motions have detected a mystery dark flow towards an unseen mass. Such a large mass is too large to have accumulated since the Big Bang using current models and may indicate that gravity falls off slower than inverse-squared at certain distance scales.[23]


Extra massive hydrogen clouds: The spectral lines of the Lyman-alpha forest suggest that hydrogen clouds are more clumped together at certain scales than expected and, like dark flow, may indicate that gravity falls off slower than inverse-squared at certain distance scales.[23]

 Alternative theories
Main article: Alternatives to general relativity
 Historical alternative theories

Aristotelian theory of gravity
Le Sage's theory of gravitation (1784) also called LeSage gravity, proposed by Georges-Louis Le Sage, based on a fluid-based explanation where a light gas fills the entire universe.
Ritz's theory of gravitation, Ann. Chem. Phys. 13, 145, (1908) pp.267271, Weber-Gauss electrodynamics applied to gravitation. Classical advancement of perihelia.
Nordstrm's theory of gravitation (1912, 1913), an early competitor of general relativity.
Whitehead's theory of gravitation (1922), another early competitor of general relativity.

 Recent alternative theories

BransDicke theory of gravity (1961)
Induced gravity (1967), a proposal by Andrei Sakharov according to which general relativity might arise from quantum field theories of matter
In the modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND) (1981), Mordehai Milgrom proposes a modification of Newton's Second Law of motion for small accelerations
The self-creation cosmology theory of gravity (1982) by G.A. Barber in which the Brans-Dicke theory is modified to allow mass creation
Nonsymmetric gravitational theory (NGT) (1994) by John Moffat
Tensorvectorscalar gravity (TeVeS) (2004), a relativistic modification of MOND by Jacob Bekenstein
Gravity as an entropic force, gravity arising as an emergent phenomenon from the thermodynamic concept of entropy.
In the superfluid vacuum theory the gravity and curved space-time arise as a collective excitation mode of non-relativistic background superfluid.

 See also




Gravitation  portal





Anti-gravity, the idea of neutralizing or repelling gravity
Artificial gravity
Birkeland current
EinsteinInfeldHoffmann equations
Escape velocity, the minimum velocity needed to escape from a gravity well
g-force, a measure of acceleration
Gauge gravitation theory
Gauss's law for gravity
Gravitational binding energy
Gravity assist
Gravity gradiometry
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment
Gravity Research Foundation
Jovian-Plutonian gravitational effect
Kepler's third law of planetary motion
Lagrangian point
Mixmaster dynamics
n-body problem
Newton's laws of motion
Pioneer anomaly
Scalar theories of gravitation
Speed of gravity
Standard gravitational parameter
Standard gravity
Weightlessness


 Notes

^ Proposition 75, Theorem 35: p.956 - I.Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman, translators: Isaac Newton, The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Preceded by A Guide to Newton's Principia, by I. Bernard Cohen. University of California Press 1999 ISBN 0-520-08816-6 ISBN 0-520-08817-4
^ Max Born (1924), Einstein's Theory of Relativity (The 1962 Dover edition, page 348 lists a table documenting the observed and calculated values for the precession of the perihelion of Mercury, Venus, and Earth.)

 Footnotes


^ Ball, Phil (06 2005). "Tall Tales". Nature News. doi:10.1038/news050613-10.
^ Galileo (1638), Two New Sciences, First Day Salviati speaks: "If this were what Aristotle meant you would burden him with another error which would amount to a falsehood; because, since there is no such sheer height available on earth, it is clear that Aristotle could not have made the experiment; yet he wishes to give us the impression of his having performed it when he speaks of such an effect as one which we see."
^ *Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (2003). Newton's Principia for the common reader. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (pp.12). The quotation comes from a memorandum thought to have been written about 1714. As early as 1645 Ismal Bullialdus had argued that any force exerted by the Sun on distant objects would have to follow an inverse-square law. However, he also dismissed the idea that any such force did exist. See, for example, Linton, Christopher M. (2004). From Eudoxus to EinsteinA History of Mathematical Astronomy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.225. ISBN978-0-521-82750-8.
^ M.C.W.Sandford (2008). "STEP: Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle". Rutherford Appleton Laboratory. http://www.sstd.rl.ac.uk/fundphys/step/. Retrieved 2011-10-14.
^ Paul S Wesson (2006). Five-dimensional Physics. World Scientific. p.82. ISBN981-256-661-9. http://books.google.com/?id=dSv8ksxHR0oC&printsec=frontcover&dq=intitle:Five+intitle:Dimensional+intitle:Physics.
^ Haugen, Mark P.; C. Lmmerzahl (2001). Principles of Equivalence: Their Role in Gravitation Physics and Experiments that Test Them. Springer. arXiv:gr-qc/0103067. ISBN978-3-540-41236-6.
^ "Gravity and Warped Spacetime". black-holes.org. http://www.black-holes.org/relativity6.html. Retrieved 2010-10-16.
^ Dmitri Pogosyan. "Lecture 20: Black HolesThe Einstein Equivalence Principle". University of Alberta. http://www.ualberta.ca/~pogosyan/teaching/ASTRO_122/lect20/lecture20.html. Retrieved 2011-10-14.
^ Pauli, Wolfgang Ernst (1958). "Part IV. General Theory of Relativity". Theory of Relativity. Courier Dover Publications. ISBN978-0-486-64152-2.
^ Dyson, F.W.; Eddington, A.S.; Davidson, C.R. (1920). "A Determination of the Deflection of Light by the Sun's Gravitational Field, from Observations Made at the Total Eclipse of May 29, 1919". Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A 220 (571581): 291333. Bibcode 1920RSPTA.220..291D. doi:10.1098/rsta.1920.0009.. Quote, p. 332: "Thus the results of the expeditions to Sobral and Principe can leave little doubt that a deflection of light takes place in the neighbourhood of the sun and that it is of the amount demanded by Einstein's generalised theory of relativity, as attributable to the sun's gravitational field."
^ Weinberg, Steven (1972). Gravitation and cosmology. John Wiley & Sons.. Quote, p. 192: "About a dozen stars in all were studied, and yielded values 1.98  0.11" and 1.61  0.31", in substantial agreement with Einstein's prediction  = 1.75"."
^ Earman, John; Glymour, Clark (1980). "Relativity and Eclipses: The British eclipse expeditions of 1919 and their predecessors". Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 11: 4985.
^ Weinberg, Steven (1972). Gravitation and cosmology. John Wiley & Sons. p.194.
^ See W.Pauli, 1958, pp.219220
^ NASA's Gravity Probe B Confirms Two Einstein Space-Time Theories
^ Galaxy Clusters Validate Einstein's Theory
^ a b Randall, Lisa (2005). Warped Passages: Unraveling the Universe's Hidden Dimensions. Ecco. ISBN0-06-053108-8.
^ Feynman, R. P.; Morinigo, F. B., Wagner, W. G., & Hatfield, B. (1995). Feynman lectures on gravitation. Addison-Wesley. ISBN0-201-62734-5.
^ Zee, A. (2003). Quantum Field Theory in a Nutshell. Princeton University Press. ISBN0-691-01019-6.
^ Chinese scientists find evidence for speed of gravity, astrowatch.com, 12/28/12.
^ Dark energy may just be a cosmic illusion, New Scientist, issue 2646, 7th March 2008.
^ Swiss-cheese model of the cosmos is full of holes, New Scientist, issue 2678, 18th October 2008.
^ a b c "Gravity may venture where matter fears to tread", Marcus Chown, New Scientist issue 2669, 16 March 2009. Original site, charges money to read it: http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg20126990.400-gravity-may-venture-where-matter-fears-to-tread.html . Mirror site, free to read article: http://www.es.sott.net/articles/show/179189-Gravity-may-venture-where-matter-fears-to-tread


 References


Halliday, David; Robert Resnick; Kenneth S. Krane (2001). Physics v. 1. New York: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN0-471-32057-9.
Serway, Raymond A.; Jewett, John W. (2004). Physics for Scientists and Engineers (6th ed.). Brooks/Cole. ISBN0-534-40842-7.
Tipler, Paul (2004). Physics for Scientists and Engineers: Mechanics, Oscillations and Waves, Thermodynamics (5th ed.). W. H. Freeman. ISBN0-7167-0809-4.


 Further reading



Look up gravitation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Gravitation



Thorne, Kip S.; Misner, Charles W.; Wheeler, John Archibald (1973). Gravitation. W.H. Freeman. ISBN0-7167-0344-0.









v
t
e


Five fundamental interactions of physics









Strong interaction
Weak interaction
Electromagnetism
Gravitation
Higgs Interaction
















v
t
e


Theories of gravitation






Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism











Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Fully compatible
with observation




EinsteinCartan
Euclidean quantum gravity
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism









Experimentally
constrained




Bimetric theories
Canonical general relativity

WheelerDeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity


Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Noncommutative geometry
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalartensor theories

BransDicke
Dilaton
KaluzaKlein
Self-creation cosmology


Scalartensorvector
Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


Tensorvectorscalar









Experimentally
excluded



Conformal gravity
Mechanical explanations

FatioLe Sage


Scalar theories

Nordstrm


Whitehead








Developmental
or disputed



Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
Entropic gravity
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
M-theory
Supergravity
Superstrings

DGP model


Twistor theory











Related theories



2+1D topological gravity
Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
GaussBonnet gravity
JackiwTeitelboim gravity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
RST model








 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 15955/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 57799/1500000
Post-expand include size: 190385/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 102160/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/40
Expensive parser function count: 4/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:38579-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130124183014 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gravitation&oldid=532839921"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: GravitationEmpirical lawsConcepts in physicsAccelerationHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 