
Hash list
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 





This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009) 


In computer science, a hash list is typically a list of hashes of the data blocks in a file or set of files. Lists of hashes are used for many different purposes, such as fast table lookup (hash tables) and distributed databases (distributed hash tables). This article covers hash lists that are used to guarantee data integrity.




A hash list with a top hash


A hash list is an extension of the old concept of hashing an item (for instance, a file). A hash list is usually sufficient for most needs, but a more advanced form of the concept is a hash tree.
Hash lists can be used to protect any kind of data stored, handled and transferred in and between computers. An important use of hash lists is to make sure that data blocks received from other peers in a peer-to-peer network are received undamaged and unaltered, and to check that the other peers do not "lie" and send fake blocks.
Usually a cryptographic hash function such as SHA-1 is used for the hashing. If the hash list only needs to protect against unintentional damage less secure checksums such as CRCs can be used.
Hash lists are better than a simple hash of the entire file since, in the case of a data block being damaged, this is noticed, and only the damaged block needs to be redownloaded. With only a hash of the file, many undamaged blocks would have to be redownloaded, and the file reconstructed and tested until the correct hash of the entire file is obtained. Hash lists also protect against nodes that try to sabotage by sending fake blocks, since in such a case the damaged block can be acquired from some other source.
[edit] Root hash
Often, an additional hash of the hash list itself (a top hash, also called root hash or master hash) is used. Before downloading a file on a p2p network, in most cases the top hash is acquired from a trusted source, for instance a friend or a web site that is known to have good recommendations of files to download. When the top hash is available, the hash list can be received from any non-trusted source, like any peer in the p2p network. Then the received hash list is checked against the trusted top hash, and if the hash list is damaged or fake, another hash list from another source will be tried until the program finds one that matches the top hash.
In some systems (like for example BitTorrent), instead of a top hash the whole hash list is available on a web site in a small file. Such a "torrent file" contains a description, file names, a hash list and some additional data.
[edit] See also

Hash tree
Hash table
Hash chain
Ed2k: URI scheme, which uses an MD4 top hash of an MD4 hash list to uniquely identify a file
Cryptographic hash function
List













v
t
e



Cryptography









History of cryptography
Cryptanalysis
Cryptography portal
Outline of cryptography











Symmetric-key algorithm
Block cipher
Stream cipher
Public-key cryptography
Cryptographic hash function
Message authentication code
Random numbers
Steganography











 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 825/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 12177/1500000
Post-expand include size: 17498/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 7297/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/40
Expensive parser function count: 1/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2497149-0!*!0!!*!4!* and timestamp 20130122175513 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hash_list&oldid=506987221"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Error detection and correctionCryptographic hash functionsHashingHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from March 2009All articles lacking sources  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 