
Network layer
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
"layer 3" redirects here. For the MPEG-1 Audio format, see MP3.  For the layer in the cerebral cortex, see Cerebral cortex#Laminar pattern.





This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (October 2009) 




The OSI model


7 Application layer


6 Presentation layer


5 Session layer


4 Transport layer


3 Network layer


2 Data link layer




LLC sublayer
MAC sublayer




1 Physical layer





v
t
e





In the seven-layer OSI model of computer networking, the network layer is layer 3. The network layer is responsible for packet forwarding including routing through intermediate routers, whereas the data link layer is responsible for media access control, flow control and error checking.
The network layer provides the functional and procedural means of transferring variable length data sequences from a source to a destination host via one or more networks while maintaining the quality of service functions.
Functions of the network layer include:

Connection model: connectionless communication


For example, IP is connectionless, in that a datagram can travel from a sender to a recipient without the recipient having to send an acknowledgement. Connection-oriented protocols exist at other, higher layers of that model.


Host addressing


Every host in the network must have a unique address that determines where it is. This address is normally assigned from a hierarchical system, so you can be "Fred Murphy" to people in your house, "Fred Murphy, 1 Main Street" to Dubliners, or "Fred Murphy, 1 Main Street, Dublin" to people in Ireland, or "Fred Murphy, 1 Main Street, Dublin, Ireland" to people anywhere in the world. On the Internet, addresses are known as Internet Protocol (IP) addresses.


Message forwarding


Since many networks are partitioned into subnetworks and connect to other networks for wide-area communications, networks use specialized hosts, called gateways or routers to forward packets between networks. This is also of interest to mobile applications, where a user may move from one location to another, and it must be arranged that his messages follow him. Version 4 of the Internet Protocol (IPv4) was not designed with this feature in mind, although mobility extensions exist. IPv6 has a better designed solution.

Within the service layering semantics of the OSI network architecture the network layer responds to service requests from the transport layer and issues service requests to the data link layer.




Contents


1 Protocols
2 Relation to TCP/IP model
3 See also
4 References
5 External links




[edit] Protocols

IPv4/IPv6, Internet Protocol
DVMRP, Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol
ICMP, Internet Control Message Protocol
IGMP, Internet Group Multicast Protocol
PIM-SM, Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode
PIM-DM, Protocol Independent Multicast Dense Mode
IPsec, Internet Protocol Security
IPX, Internetwork Packet Exchange
RIP, Routing Information Protocol
DDP, Datagram Delivery Protocol
RSMLT Routed-SMLT
ARP, Address Resolution Protocol
Shortest Path Bridging

[edit] Relation to TCP/IP model
The TCP/IP model describes the protocols used by the Internet.[1] This model has a layer called the Internet layer, located above the link layer. In many textbooks and other secondary references the Internet layer is equated with OSI's network layer. However, this comparison is misleading as the allowed characteristics of protocols (e.g., whether they are connection-oriented or connection-less) placed into these layers are different in the two models. The Internet layer of TCP/IP is in fact only a subset of functionality of the network layer. It only describes one type of network architecture, the Internet.
In general, direct or strict comparisons between these models should be avoided, since the layering in TCP/IP is not a principal design criterion and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) considers it "harmful".[2]
[edit] See also

Datakit
Router
DECnet
AppleTalk

[edit] References


^ RFC 1122
^ RFC 3439



Tanenbaum, Andrew S. (2003). Computer networks. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN0-13-066102-3.

[edit] External links

OSI Reference ModelThe ISO Model of Architecture for Open Systems Interconnection, Hubert Zimmermann, IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 28, no. 4, April 1980, pp. 425  432. (PDF-Datei; 776kB)

 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 1443/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 22418/1500000
Post-expand include size: 14839/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 4970/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/40
Expensive parser function count: 2/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:85024-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20121219062147 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Network_layer&oldid=518876558"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: OSI protocolsNetwork layer protocolsHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2009All articles lacking in-text citations  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 