
Newtonian fluid
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
In continuum mechanics, a fluid is said to be Newtonian if the viscous stresses that arise from its flow, at every point, are proportional the local strain rate  the rate of change of its deformation over time.[1] [2][3] That is equivalent to saying that those forces are proportional to the the rates of change of the fluid's velocity vector as one moves away from the point in question in various directions.
More precisely, a fluid is Newtonian if, and only if, the tensors that describe the viscous stress and the strain rate are related by a constant viscosity tensor that does not depend on the stress state and velocity of the flow. If the fluid is also isotropic (that is, its mechanical properties are the same along any direction), the viscosity tensor reduces to two real coefficients, describing the fluid's resistance to continuous shear deformation and continuous compression or expansion, respectively.
Newtonian fluids are the simplest mathematical models of fluids that account for viscosity. While no real fluid fits the definition perfectly, many common liquids and gases, such as water and air, can be assumed to be Newtonian for practical calculations under ordinary conditions. Non-Newtonian fluids are relatively rare, but include oobleck (which become stiffer when vigorously sheared), or non-drip paint (which become thinner when sheared). Other examples include some polymer solutions, molten polymers, many solid suspensions, blood, and most highly viscous fluids.
Newtonian fluids are named after Isaac Newton, who first derived the relation between the rate of shear strain rate and shear stress for such fluids in differential form.




Contents


1 Definition

1.1 Incompressible isotropic case
1.2 For anisotropic fluids


2 Examples
3 See also
4 References




[edit] Definition
An element of a flowing liquid or gas will suffer forces from the surrounding fluid, including viscous stress forces that cause it to gradually deform over time. These forces can be mathematically approximated to first order by a viscous stress tensor, which is usually denoted by .
The deformation of that fluid element, relative to some previous state, can be approximated to first order by a strain tensor that changes with time. The time derivative of that tensor is the strain rate tensor, that expresses how the element's deformation is changing with time; and is also the gradient of the velocity vector field  at that point, often denoted .
The tensors  and  can be expressed by 33 matrices, relative to any chosen coordinate system. The fluid is said to be Newtonian if these matrices are related by the equation  where  is a fixed 33 matrix, that does not depend on the velocity or stress state of the fluid.
[edit] Incompressible isotropic case
For an incompressible and isotropic Newtonian fluid, the viscous stress is related to the strain rate by the simpler equation



where

 is the shear stress ("drag") in the fluid,
 is a scalar constant of proportionality, the shear viscosity of the fluid
 is the the derivative of the velocity component that is parallel to the direction of shear, relative to displacement in the perpendicular direction.

If the fluid is incompressible and viscosity is constant across the fluid, this equation can be written in terms of an arbitrary coordinate system as



where

 is the th spatial coordinate
 is the fluid's velocity in the direction of axis 
 is the th component of the stress acting on the faces of the fluid element perpendicular to axis .

One also defines a total stress tensor ) that combines the shear stress with conventional (thermodynamic) pressure . The stress-shear equation then becomes



[edit] For anisotropic fluids
More generally, in a non-isotropic Newtonian fluid, the coefficient  that relates internal friction stresses to the spatial derivatives of the velocity field is replaced by a nine-element viscosity tensor .
The can be decomposed into an antisymmetric part that expresses the fluids resistance to shearing flow, and a symmetric part that expresses its resistance to compression or expansion flows. The latter has nine independent parameters in general, but for isotropic fluids it reduces to two numbers, the shear viscosity and the bulk viscosity.
[edit] Examples
Water and air are examples of (practically) Newtonian fluids, which include , and exhibit the Weissenberg effect
[edit] See also


Continuum mechanics







Laws


Conservation of mass
Conservation of momentum
Conservation of energy
Entropy inequality








Solid mechanics


Solids
Stress
Deformation
Compatibility
Finite strain
Infinitesimal strain
Elasticity

linear


Plasticity
Bending
Hooke's law
Failure theory
Fracture mechanics
Contact mechanics

Frictionless
Frictional










Fluid mechanics


Fluids
Fluid statics
Fluid dynamics
NavierStokes equations
Bernoulli's principle
Buoyancy
Viscosity

Newtonian
Non-Newtonian


Archimedes' principle
Pascal's law
Pressure
Liquids
Surface tension
Capillary action
Gases
Atmosphere
Boyle's law
Charles's law
Gay-Lussac's law
Combined gas law
Plasma








Rheology


Viscoelasticity
Smart fluids

Magnetorheological
Electrorheological
Ferrofluids


Rheometry
Rheometer








Scientists


Bernoulli
Boyle
Cauchy
Charles
Euler
Gay-Lussac
Hooke
Pascal
Newton
Navier
Stokes









v
t
e






Non-newtonian fluid

[edit] References


^ G. K. Batchelor (2000) [1967]. An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics. Cambridge Mathematical Library series, Cambridge University Press. ISBN0-521-66396-2. http://books.google.com/?id=Rla7OihRvUgC&lpg=PP1&dq=An%20Introduction%20to%20Fluid%20Dynamics&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q.
^ Kundu P and Cohen I. Fluid Mechanics.
^ Kirby, B.J. (2010). Micro- and Nanoscale Fluid Mechanics: Transport in Microfluidic Devices.. Cambridge University Press. ISBN978-0-521-11903-0. http://www.kirbyresearch.com/textbook.










v
t
e


Branches of physics






Divisions



Applied physics
Experimental physics
Theoretical physics








Energy and motion



Classical mechanics

Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics


Continuum mechanics
Celestial mechanics
Statistical mechanics
Thermodynamics
Fluid mechanics
Quantum mechanics








Waves and fields



Gravitation
Electromagnetism
Quantum field theory
Relativity

Special relativity
General relativity











Physical sciences
and mathematics




Accelerator physics
Acoustics
Astrophysics

Heliophysics
Nuclear astrophysics
Solar physics
Space physics
Stellar physics


Atomic, molecular, and optical physics
Chemical physics
Computational physics
Condensed matter physics

Solid-state physics


Digital physics
Material physics
Mathematical physics
Nuclear physics
Optics

Nonlinear optics
Quantum optics


Particle physics

Astroparticle physics
Phenomenology


Plasma
Polymer physics
Statistical physics









Physics and biology/
geology/ economics




Biophysics

Biomechanics
Medical physics
Neurophysics


Agrophysics

Soil physics


Atmospheric physics
Econophysics
Geophysics
Psychophysics








 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 3482/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 38537/1500000
Post-expand include size: 50249/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 21387/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/40
Expensive parser function count: 0/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:363903-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130127040940 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Newtonian_fluid&oldid=534385401"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: ViscosityFluid dynamics  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 