
Pascal's law
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
Not to be confused with Pascal's rule.


Continuum mechanics







Laws


Conservation of mass
Conservation of momentum
Conservation of energy
Entropy inequality








Solid mechanics


Solids
Stress
Deformation
Compatibility
Finite strain
Infinitesimal strain
Elasticity

linear


Plasticity
Bending
Hooke's law
Failure theory
Fracture mechanics
Contact mechanics

Frictionless
Frictional










Fluid mechanics


Fluids
Fluid statics
Fluid dynamics
NavierStokes equations
Bernoulli's principle
Buoyancy
Viscosity

Newtonian
Non-Newtonian


Archimedes' principle
Pascal's law
Pressure
Liquids
Surface tension
Capillary action
Gases
Atmosphere
Boyle's law
Charles's law
Gay-Lussac's law
Combined gas law
Plasma








Rheology


Viscoelasticity
Smart fluids

Magnetorheological
Electrorheological
Ferrofluids


Rheometry
Rheometer








Scientists


Bernoulli
Boyle
Cauchy
Charles
Euler
Gay-Lussac
Hooke
Pascal
Newton
Navier
Stokes









v
t
e









The effects of Pascal's law, as Pascal discovered in his 1646 barrel experiment


Pascal's law or the principle of transmission of fluid-pressure is a principle in fluid mechanics that states that pressure exerted anywhere in a confined incompressible fluid is transmitted equally in all directions throughout the fluid such that the pressure ratio (initial difference) remains the same.[1] The law was established by French mathematician Blaise Pascal.[2]




Contents


1 Definition
2 Explanation
3 Applications
4 See also
5 References




[edit] Definition
Pascal's principle is defined

A change in pressure at any point in an enclosed fluid at rest is transmitted undiminished to all points in the fluid

This principle is stated mathematically as:



where

 is the hydrostatic pressure (given in pascals in the SI system), or the difference in pressure at two points within a fluid column, due to the weight of the fluid;
 is the fluid density (in kilograms per cubic meter in the SI system);
g is acceleration due to gravity (normally using the sea level acceleration due to Earth's gravity in metres per second squared);
 is the height of fluid above the point of measurement, or the difference in elevation between the two points within the fluid column (in metres in SI).

The intuitive explanation of this formula is that the change in pressure between two elevations is due to the weight of the fluid between the elevations. Note that the variation with height does not depend on any additional pressures. Therefore Pascal's law can be interpreted as saying that any change in pressure applied at any given point of the fluid is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid.
[edit] Explanation
If a U-tube is filled with water and pistons are placed at each end, pressure exerted against the left piston will be transmitted throughout the liquid and against the bottom of the right piston. (The pistons are simply "plugs" that can slide freely but snugly inside the tube.) The pressure that the left piston exerts against the water will be exactly equal to the pressure the water exerts against the right piston. Suppose the tube on the right side is made wider and a piston of a larger area is used; for example, the piston on the right has 50 times the area of the piston on the left. If a 10kg load is placed on the left piston, an additional pressure (nearly 1 N/cm2) due to the weight of the load is transmitted throughout the liquid and up against the larger piston. The difference between force and pressure is important: the additional pressure is exerted against every square centimeter of the larger piston. Since there is 50 times the area, 50 times as much force is exerted on the larger piston. Thus, the larger piston will support a 500kg load - fifty times the load on the smaller piston.
Forces can be multiplied using such a device. One newton input produces 50 newtons output. By further increasing the area of the larger piston (or reducing the area of the smaller piston), forces can be multiplied, in principle, by any amount. Pascal's principle underlies the operation of the hydraulic press. The hydraulic press does not violate energy conservation, because a decrease in distance moved compensates for the increase in force. When the small piston is moved downward 10 centimeters, the large piston will be raised only one-fiftieth of this, or 0.2 centimeters. The input force multiplied by the distance moved by the smaller piston is equal to the output force multiplied by the distance moved by the larger piston; this is one more example of a simple machine operating on the same principle as a mechanical lever.
Pascal's principle applies to all fluids, whether gases or liquids. A typical application of Pascal's principle for gases and liquids is the automobile lift seen in many service stations (the hydraulic jack). Increased air pressure produced by an air compressor is transmitted through the air to the surface of oil in an underground reservoir. The oil, in turn, transmits the pressure to a piston, which lifts the automobile. The relatively low pressure that exerts the lifting force against the piston is about the same as the air pressure in automobile tires. Hydraulics is employed by modern devices ranging from very small to enormous. For example, there are hydraulic pistons in almost all construction machines where heavy loads are involved.
[edit] Applications

The siphon
The underlying principle of the hydraulic jack and hydraulic press
Force amplification in the braking system of most motor vehicles.
Used in artesian wells, water towers, and dams.
Scuba divers must understand this principle. At a depth of 10 meters under water, pressure is twice the atmospheric pressure at sea level, and increases by about 100 kPa for each increase of 10m depth.[2]

[edit] See also

Pascal (unit)
Fluid statics
Pascal's contributions to the physical sciences

[edit] References


^ Bloomfield, Louis (2006). How Things Work: The Physics of Everyday Life (Third Edition). John Wiley & Sons. pp.153. ISBN0-471-46886-X.
^ a b Acott, Chris (1999). "The diving "Law-ers": A brief resume of their lives.". South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society journal 29 (1). ISSN0813-1988. OCLC16986801. http://archive.rubicon-foundation.org/5990. Retrieved 2011-06-14..










v
t
e


Blaise Pascal






Experiments, inventions, and career



Pascal's barrel
Pascal's calculator
Pascal's law
Pascal's theorem
Pascal's triangle
Pascal's Wager








Works



Lettres provinciales (1656-1657)
Penses (1669)








Family



tienne Pascal (father)
Jacqueline Pascal (sister)








 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 2848/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 41485/1500000
Post-expand include size: 43310/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 18140/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/40
Expensive parser function count: 0/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:21510668-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130127002425 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pascal%27s_law&oldid=535076039"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: HydrostaticsFluid mechanicsBlaise Pascal  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 