
Query optimization
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 





It has been suggested that this article or section be merged with Query optimizer. (Discuss) Proposed since October 2012. 


Query optimization is a function of many relational database management systems in which multiple query plans for satisfying a query are examined and a good query plan is identified. This may or not be the absolute best strategy because there are many ways of doing plans. There is a trade-off between the amount of time spent figuring out the best plan and the amount running the plan. Different qualities of database management systems have different ways of balancing these two. Cost based query optimizers evaluate the resource footprint of various query plans and use this as the basis for plan selection.
Typically the resources which are costed are CPU path length, amount of disk buffer space, disk storage service time, and interconnect usage between units of parallelism. The set of query plans examined is formed by examining possible access paths (e.g., primary index access, secondary index access, full file scan) and various relational table join techniques (e.g., merge join, hash join, product join). The search space can become quite large depending on the complexity of the SQL query. There are two types of optimization. These consist of logical optimization which generates a sequence of relational algebra to solve the query. In addition there is physical optimization which is used to determine the means of carrying out each operation.
[edit] External links

Information about query optimization
Query optimization example
Sargable Query









v
t
e


Database management systems









Database models
Database normalization
Database storage
Distributed DBMS
Federated database system
Referential integrity
Relational algebra
Relational calculus
Relational database
Relational DBMS
Relational model
Object-relational database
Transaction processing








Concepts



Database
ACID
CRUD
Null
Candidate key
Foreign key
Primary key
Superkey
Surrogate key
Armstrong's axioms
NoSQL








Objects



Relation

table
column
row


View
Transaction
Log
Trigger
Index
Stored procedure
Cursor
Partition








Components



Concurrency control
Data dictionary
JDBC
XQJ
ODBC
Query language
Query optimizer
Query plan








Functions



Administration and automation
Query optimization
Replication











Database products
Object-oriented

comparison


Relational

comparison


Document-oriented
NewSQL








 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 951/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 15136/1500000
Post-expand include size: 18706/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 8756/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/40
Expensive parser function count: 1/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:3480761-0!*!0!*!*!4!* and timestamp 20121211143220 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Query_optimization&oldid=515748379"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Database management systemsDatabase algorithmsSQLHidden categories: Articles to be merged from October 2012All articles to be merged  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 