
Radio
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
This article is about radio as a technology.  For other uses, including radio broadcasting as an art form, see Radio (disambiguation).




How radio communication works. Information such as sound is transformed into an electronic signal which is applied to a transmitter. The transmitter sends the information through space on a radio wave (electromagnetic wave). A receiver intercepts some of the radio wave and extracts the information-bearing electronic signal, which is converted back to its original form by a transducer such as a speaker.


Radio is the wireless transmission of signals through free space by electromagnetic radiation of a frequency significantly below that of visible light, in the radio frequency range, from about 30kHz to 300GHz.[1] These waves are called radio waves. Electromagnetic radiation travels by means of oscillating electromagnetic fields that pass through the air and the vacuum of space.
Information, such as sound, is carried by systematically changing (modulating) some property of the radiated waves, such as their amplitude, frequency, phase, or pulse width. When radio waves strike an electrical conductor, the oscillating fields induce an alternating current in the conductor. The information in the waves can be extracted and transformed back into its original form.




Classic radio receiver dial






Contents


1 Etymology
2 Processes

2.1 Transmitter and modulation
2.2 Antenna
2.3 Propagation
2.4 Resonance
2.5 Receiver and demodulation
2.6 Radio band


3 Communication systems
4 History

4.1 19th century
4.2 20th century


5 Uses of radio

5.1 Audio
5.2 Telephony
5.3 Video
5.4 Navigation
5.5 Radar
5.6 Data (digital radio)
5.7 Heating
5.8 Amateur radio service
5.9 Unlicensed radio services
5.10 Radio control (RC)


6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links




[edit] Etymology
The etymology of "radio" or "radiotelegraphy" reveals that it was called "wireless telegraphy," which was shortened to "wireless" in Britain. The prefix radio- in the sense of wireless transmission, was first recorded in the word radioconductor, a description provided by the French physicist douard Branly in 1897. It is based on the verb to radiate (in Latin "radius" means "spoke of a wheel, beam of light, ray").
The word "radio" also appears in a 1907 article by Lee De Forest. It was adopted by the United States Navy in 1912, to distinguish radio from several other wireless communication technologies, such as the photophone. The term became common by the time of the first commercial broadcasts in the United States in the 1920s. (The noun "broadcasting" itself came from an agricultural term, meaning "scattering seeds widely.") The term was adopted by other languages in Europe and Asia. British Commonwealth countries continued to commonly use the term "wireless" until the mid-20th century, though the magazine of the BBC in the UK has been called Radio Times ever since it was first published in the early 1920s.
In recent years the more general term "wireless" has gained renewed popularity through the rapid growth of short-range computer networking, e.g., Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN), Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth, as well as mobile telephony, e.g., GSM and UMTS. Today, the term "radio" specifies the actual type of transceiver device or chip, whereas "wireless" refers to the lack of physical connections; one talks about radio transceivers, but about wireless devices and wireless sensor networks.
[edit] Processes
Radio systems used for communications will have the following elements. With more than 100 years of development, each process is implemented by a wide range of methods, specialized for different communications purposes.
[edit] Transmitter and modulation
See also: Radio transmitter design
Each system contains a transmitter. This consists of a source of electrical energy, producing alternating current of a desired frequency of oscillation. The transmitter contains a system to modulate (change) some property of the energy produced to impress a signal on it. This modulation might be as simple as turning the energy on and off, or altering more subtle properties such as amplitude, frequency, phase, or combinations of these properties. The transmitter sends the modulated electrical energy to a tuned resonant antenna; this structure converts the rapidly changing alternating current into an electromagnetic wave that can move through free space (sometimes with a particular polarization).




An audio signal (top) may be carried by an AM or FM radio wave.


Amplitude modulation of a carrier wave works by varying the strength of the transmitted signal in proportion to the information being sent. For example, changes in the signal strength can be used to reflect the sounds to be reproduced by a speaker, or to specify the light intensity of television pixels. It was the method used for the first audio radio transmissions, and remains in use today. "AM" is often used to refer to the mediumwave broadcast band (see AM radio).
Frequency modulation varies the frequency of the carrier. The instantaneous frequency of the carrier is directly proportional to the instantaneous value of the input signal. Digital data can be sent by shifting the carrier's frequency among a set of discrete values, a technique known as frequency-shift keying.
FM is commonly used at VHF radio frequencies for high-fidelity broadcasts of music and speech (see FM broadcasting). Normal (analog) TV sound is also broadcast using FM.
Angle modulation alters the instantaneous phase of a carrier wave to transmit a signal. It is another term for Phase modulation.
[edit] Antenna
Main article: Antenna (radio)




Rooftop television antennas in Israel. Yagi-Uda antennas like these six are widely used at VHF and UHF frequencies.


An antenna (or aerial) is an electrical device which converts electric currents into radio waves, and vice versa. It is usually used with a radio transmitter or radio receiver. In transmission, a radio transmitter applies an oscillating radio frequency electric current to the antenna's terminals, and the antenna radiates the energy from the current as electromagnetic waves (radio waves). In reception, an antenna intercepts some of the power of an electromagnetic wave in order to produce a tiny voltage at its terminals, that is applied to a receiver to be amplified. An antenna can be used for both transmitting and receiving.
[edit] Propagation
Main article: Radio propagation
Once generated, electromagnetic waves travel through space either directly, or have their path altered by reflection, refraction or diffraction. The intensity of the waves diminishes due to geometric dispersion (the inverse-square law); some energy may also be absorbed by the intervening medium in some cases. Noise will generally alter the desired signal; this electromagnetic interference comes from natural sources, as well as from artificial sources such as other transmitters and accidental radiators. Noise is also produced at every step due to the inherent properties of the devices used. If the magnitude of the noise is large enough, the desired signal will no longer be discernible; this is the fundamental limit to the range of radio communications.
[edit] Resonance
Main article: Electrical resonance
See also: LC circuit
Electrical resonance of tuned circuits in radios allow individual stations to be selected. A resonant circuit will respond strongly to a particular frequency, and much less so to differing frequencies. This allows the radio receiver to discriminate between multiple signals differing in frequency.
[edit] Receiver and demodulation
See also: Radio receiver design, Receiver (radio), Radio receiver, Crystal radio,and Communications receiver




A Crystal Receiver, consisting of an antenna, rheostat, coil, crystal rectifier, capacitor, headphones and ground connection.


The electromagnetic wave is intercepted by a tuned receiving antenna; this structure captures some of the energy of the wave and returns it to the form of oscillating electrical currents. At the receiver, these currents are demodulated, which is conversion to a usable signal form by a detector sub-system. The receiver is "tuned" to respond preferentially to the desired signals, and reject undesired signals.
Early radio systems relied entirely on the energy collected by an antenna to produce signals for the operator. Radio became more useful after the invention of electronic devices such as the vacuum tube and later the transistor, which made it possible to amplify weak signals. Today radio systems are used for applications from walkie-talkie children's toys to the control of space vehicles, as well as for broadcasting, and many other applications.
A radio receiver receives its input from an antenna, uses electronic filters to separate a wanted radio signal from all other signals picked up by this antenna, amplifies it to a level suitable for further processing, and finally converts through demodulation and decoding the signal into a form usable for the consumer, such as sound, pictures, digital data, measurement values, navigational positions, etc.[2]
[edit] Radio band
Main article: Radio frequency


Light Comparison


Name
Wavelength
Frequency (Hz)
Photon Energy (eV)


Gamma ray
less than 0.01nm
more than 10 EHZ
100 keV - 300+ GeV


X-Ray
0.01 to 10nm
30 PHz - 30 EHZ
120 eV to 120 keV


Ultraviolet
10nm - 400nm
30 EHZ - 790 THz
3 eV to 124 eV


Visible
390nm - 750nm
790 THz - 405 THz
1.7 eV - 3.3 eV


Infrared
750nm - 1mm
405 THz - 300GHz
1.24 meV - 1.7 eV


Microwave
1mm - 1 meter
300GHz - 300MHz
1.24 meV - 1.24 eV


Radio
1mm - km
300 GHz - 3 Hz
1.24 meV - 12.4 feV


Radio frequencies occupy the range from a few hertz to 300GHz, although commercially important uses of radio use only a small part of this spectrum.[3] Other types of electromagnetic radiation, with frequencies above the RF range, are infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays. Since the energy of an individual photon of radio frequency is too low to remove an electron from an atom, radio waves are classified as non-ionizing radiation.
[edit] Communication systems
A radio communication system sends signals by radio.[4] Types of radio communication systems deployed depend on technology, standards, regulations, radio spectrum allocation, user requirements, service positioning, and investment.[5]
The radio equipment involved in communication systems includes a transmitter and a receiver, each having an antenna and appropriate terminal equipment such as a microphone at the transmitter and a loudspeaker at the receiver in the case of a voice-communication system.[6]
The power consumed in a transmitting station varies depending on the distance of communication and the transmission conditions. The power received at the receiving station is usually only a tiny fraction of the transmitter's output, since communication depends on receiving the information, not the energy, that was transmitted.
Classical radio communications systems use frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) as a strategy to split up and share the available radio-frequency bandwidth for use by different parties communications concurrently. Modern radio communication systems include those that divide up a radio-frequency band by time-division multiplexing (TDM) and code-division multiplexing (CDM) as alternatives to the classical FDM strategy. These systems offer different tradeoffs in supporting multiple users, beyond the FDM strategy that was ideal for broadcast radio but less so for applications such as mobile telephony.
A radio communication system may send information only one way. For example, in broadcasting a single transmitter sends signals to many receivers. Two stations may take turns sending and receiving, using a single radio frequency; this is called "simplex." By using two radio frequencies, two stations may continuously and concurrently send and receive signals - this is called "duplex" operation.

[edit] History
Main article: History of radio
[edit] 19th century
Main article: Invention of radio
The meaning and usage of the word "radio" has developed in parallel with developments within the field of communications and can be seen to have three distinct phases: electromagnetic waves and experimentation; wireless communication and technical development; and radio broadcasting and commercialization. Many individualsinventors, engineers, developers, businessmen - contributed to produce the modern idea of radio and thus the origins and 'invention' are multiple and controversial. Early radio designs could not transmit sound or speech and were called the "wireless telegraph."
Development from a laboratory demonstration to a commercial entity spanned several decades and required the efforts of many practitioners. In 1878, David E. Hughes noticed that sparks could be heard in a telephone receiver when experimenting with his carbon microphone. He developed this carbon-based detector further and eventually could detect signals over a few hundred yards. He demonstrated his discovery to the Royal Society in 1880, but was told it was merely induction, and therefore abandoned further research.
Experiments were undertaken by Thomas Edison and his employees of Menlo Park. Edison applied in 1885 to the U.S. Patent Office for a patent on an electrostatic coupling system between elevated terminals. The patent was granted as U.S. Patent 465,971 on December 29, 1891. The Marconi Company would later purchase rights to the Edison patent to protect them legally from lawsuits.[7]




Tesla demonstrating wireless transmissions during his high frequency and potential lecture of 1891. After continued research, Tesla presented the fundamentals of radio in 1893.


In 1893, in St. Louis, Missouri, Nikola Tesla made devices for his experiments with electricity. Addressing the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia and the National Electric Light Association, he described and demonstrated the principles of his wireless work.[8] The descriptions contained all the elements that were later incorporated into radio systems before the development of the vacuum tube. He initially experimented with magnetic receivers, unlike the coherers (detecting devices consisting of tubes filled with iron filings which had been invented by Temistocle Calzecchi-Onesti at Fermo in Italy in 1884) used by Guglielmo Marconi and other early experimenters.[9]
A demonstration of wireless telegraphy took place in the lecture theater of the Oxford University Museum of Natural History on August 14, 1894, carried out by Professor Oliver Lodge and Alexander Muirhead. During the demonstration a radio signal was sent from the neighboring Clarendon laboratory building, and received by apparatus in the lecture theater.
In November 1894 public demonstration at Town Hall of Kolkata, Jagadish Chandra Bose ignited gunpowder and rang a bell at a distance using millimetre range wavelength microwaves. Bose wrote in a Bengali essay, Adrisya Alok (Invisible Light), The invisible light can easily pass through brick walls, buildings etc. Therefore, messages can be transmitted by means of it without the mediation of wires. Boses first scientific paper, On polarisation of electric rays by double-refracting crystals was communicated to the Asiatic Society of Bengal in May 1895. His second paper was communicated to the Royal Society of London by Lord Rayleigh in October 1895. In December 1895, the London journal the Electrician (Vol. 36) published Boses paper, On a new electro-polariscope. At that time, the word coherer, coined by Lodge, was used in the English-speaking world for Hertzian wave receivers or detectors. The Electrician readily commented on Boses coherer. (December 1895). The Englishman (18 January 1896) quoted from the Electrician and commented as follows:Should Professor Bose succeed in perfecting and patenting his Coherer, we may in time see the whole system of coast lighting throughout the navigable world revolutionised by a Bengali scientist working single handed in our Presidency College Laboratory. Bose planned to perfect his coherer but never thought of patenting it.
In 1895 Alexander Stepanovich Popov built his first radio receiver, which contained a coherer. Further refined as a lightning detector, it was presented to the Russian Physical and Chemical Society on May 7, 1895. A depiction of Popov's lightning detector was printed in the Journal of the Russian Physical and Chemical Society the same year. Until recently, mistakenly believed that it was the first description (publication of the minutes 15/201 of this session  December issue of the journal RPCS[10]), but in fact the first description of the device gave Dmitry Aleksandrovich Lachinov in July 1895 in the 2nd edition of his course "Fundamentals of Meteorology and climatology"  the first in Russia.[11][12] Popov's receiver was created on the improved basis of Lodge's receiver, and originally intended for reproduction of its experiments.
Marconi was the first scientist to achieve successful radio transmission.[13] In 1895, Marconi built a wireless system capable of transmitting signals at long distances (1.5mi./ 2.4km).[14][15] In radio transmission technology, early public experimenters had made short distance broadcasts.[16] Marconi achieved long range signalling due to a wireless transmitting apparatus and a radio receiver claimed by him.[17][18] From Marconi's experiments, the phenomenon that transmission range is proportional to the square of antenna height is known as "Marconi's law."[19]
Marconi's experimental apparatus proved to be the first engineering complete, commercially successful radio transmission system.[18][20][21] According to the Proceedings of the United States Naval Institute in 1899, the Marconi instruments had a "[...] coherer, principle of which was discovered some twenty years ago, [and was] the only electrical instrument or device contained in the apparatus that is at all new."[22]




Telephone Herald in Budapest, Hungary (1901).


In 1896, Marconi was awarded British patent 12039, Improvements in transmitting electrical impulses and signals and in apparatus there-for, for radio. In 1897, he established a radio station on the Isle of Wight, England. Marconi opened his "wireless" factory in the former silk-works at Hall Street, Chelmsford, England in 1898, employing around 60 people. Shortly after the 1900s, Marconi held the patent rights for radio.
[edit] 20th century
In 1900, Brazilian priest Roberto Landell de Moura transmitted the human voice by wireless. According the newspaper Jornal do Comercio (June 10, 1900), he conducted his first public experiment on June 3, 1900, in front of journalists and the General Consul of Great Britain, C.P. Lupton, in So Paulo, Brazil, for a distance of approximately 8km. The points of transmission and reception were Alto de Santana and Paulista Avenue.[23]
One year after that experiment, he received his first patent from the Brazilian government. It was described as "equipment for the purpose of phonetic transmissions through space, land and water elements at a distance with or without the use of wires." Four months later, knowing that his invention had real value, he left Brazil for the United States of America with the intent of patenting the machine at the US Patent Office in Washington, DC.
Having few resources, he had to rely on friends to push his project. In spite of great difficulty, three patents were awarded: "The Wave Transmitter" (October 11, 1904) which is the precursor of today's radio transceiver; "The Wireless Telephone" and the "Wireless Telegraph," both dated November 22, 1904.




"The Wireless Telephone" U S Patent Office in Washington, DC


In June 1912 after the RMS Titanic disaster, due to increased production Marconi opened the world's first purpose-built radio factory at New Street Works, also in Chelmsford, England.
The next advancement was the vacuum tube detector, invented by Westinghouse engineers. On Christmas Eve 1906, Reginald Fessenden used a synchronous rotary-spark transmitter for the first radio program broadcast, from Ocean Bluff-Brant Rock, Massachusetts. Ships at sea heard a broadcast that included Fessenden playing O Holy Night on the violin and reading a passage from the Bible.[24]
This was, for all intents and purposes, the first transmission of what is now known as amplitude modulation or AM radio. The first radio news program was broadcast August 31, 1920 by station 8MK in Detroit, Michigan, which survives today as all-news format station WWJ under ownership of the CBS network. The first college radio station began broadcasting on October 14, 1920 from Union College, Schenectady, New York under the personal call letters of Wendell King, an African-American student at the school.[24]
That month 2ADD (renamed WRUC in 1947), aired what is believed to be the first public entertainment broadcast in the United States, a series of Thursday night concerts initially heard within a 100-mile (160km) radius and later for a 1,000-mile (1,600km) radius. In November 1920, it aired the first broadcast of a sporting event.[24][25] At 9 pm on August 27, 1920, Sociedad Radio Argentina aired a live performance of Richard Wagner's opera Parsifal from the Coliseo Theater in downtown Buenos Aires. Only about twenty homes in the city had receivers to tune in this radio program. Meanwhile, regular entertainment broadcasts commenced in 1922 from the Marconi Research Centre at Writtle, England.
Sports broadcasting began at this time as well, including the college football on radio broadcast of a 1921 West Virginia vs. Pittsburgh football game.[26]

In 1943, the United States Supreme Court invalidated one of the Marconi patents, number 763,772 (1904), on the basis it had been anticipated by Tesla, Lodge, and others. After years of patent battles by Marconi's company, the United States Supreme Court, in the 1943 case of Marconi Wireless Telegraph co. of America v. United States, 320 U.S. 1 (1943), said that "it is now held that in the important advance upon his basic patent Marconi did nothing that had not already been seen and disclosed."[27][28][29]
Although Marconi claimed that he had no knowledge of prior art regarding adjustable "four-circuit" transformer configuration for radio transmission and reception, the Supreme Court considered his claim false.[30] In addition to that ruling from the Supreme Court, the United States Court of Claims invalidated the fundamental 1935 Marconi patent.[31] The 1943 decision didn't overturn Marconi's original patents, or his reputation as the first person to develop practical radiotelegraphic communication. It just said that the adoption of adjustable transformers in the transmitting and receiving circuits, which was an improvement of the initial invention, was anticipated by patents issued to Oliver Lodge and John Stone Stone. (This decision wasn't unanimous)[32]




An American middle-class girl listens to a radio during the Great Depression.


In contrast, related developments in the United Kingdom saw the High Court of Justice uphold Marconi's British Patent, issued on April 26, 1900. This patent disclosed a four-circuit system, which was strikingly similar to a four-circuit system disclosed in U.S. patent #645,576 that was issued earlier to Tesla on March 20, 1900. It must be emphasized that Tesla's patent was not meant to be used in a radio transmission apparatus and it didn't exhibit any presence of a variable inductance for varying the tuning frequency of the four circuits. This is not surprising since Tesla had only a barely understanding of electromagnetic radio physic[dubious  discuss] and at least through 1919, he didn't believe that the radio signals predicted by Maxwell and experimentally shown by Hertz really existed. On the matter of invention, it is held that Marconi knowingly and unknowingly used the scientific and experimental work of others who were devising their own radio tuning apparatus' around the same time, such as the work of American electrical engineer John Stone Stone who was issued several U.S. patents between 1904 and 1908. However, what made Marconi more successful than any other was his ability to commercialize radio and its associated equipment into a global business.[33][dubious  discuss]
One of the first developments in the early 20th century was that aircraft used commercial AM radio stations for navigation. This continued until the early 1960s when VOR systems became widespread.[34] In the early 1930s, single sideband and frequency modulation were invented by amateur radio operators. By the end of the decade, they were established commercial modes. Radio was used to transmit pictures visible as television as early as the 1920s. Commercial television transmissions started in North America and Europe in the 1940s.




The Regency TR-1 which used Texas Instruments' NPN transistors was the world's first commercially produced transistor radio.


In 1954, the Regency company introduced a pocket transistor radio, the TR-1, powered by a "standard 22.5 V Battery." In 1955, the newly formed Sony company introduced its first transistorized radio.[35] It was small enough to fit in a vest pocket, powered by a small battery. It was durable, because it had no vacuum tubes to burn out. Over the next 20 years, transistors replaced tubes almost completely except for high-power transmitters.
By 1963, color television was being broadcast commercially (though not all broadcasts or programs were in color), and the first (radio) communication satellite, Telstar, was launched. In the late 1960s, the U.S. long-distance telephone network began to convert to a digital network, employing digital radios for many of its links. In the 1970s, LORAN became the premier radio navigation system.
Soon, the U.S. Navy experimented with satellite navigation, culminating in the launch of the Global Positioning System (GPS) constellation in 1987. In the early 1990s, amateur radio experimenters began to use personal computers with audio cards to process radio signals. In 1994, the U.S. Army and DARPA launched an aggressive, successful project to construct a software-defined radio that can be programmed to be virtually any radio by changing its software program. Digital transmissions began to be applied to broadcasting in the late 1990s.
[edit] Uses of radio
Early uses were maritime, for sending telegraphic messages using Morse code between ships and land. The earliest users included the Japanese Navy scouting the Russian fleet during the Battle of Tsushima in 1905. One of the most memorable uses of marine telegraphy was during the sinking of the RMS Titanic in 1912, including communications between operators on the sinking ship and nearby vessels, and communications to shore stations listing the survivors.
Radio was used to pass on orders and communications between armies and navies on both sides in World War I; Germany used radio communications for diplomatic messages once it discovered that its submarine cables had been tapped by the British. The United States passed on President Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points to Germany via radio during the war. Broadcasting began from San Jose, California in 1909,[36] and became feasible in the 1920s, with the widespread introduction of radio receivers, particularly in Europe and the United States. Besides broadcasting, point-to-point broadcasting, including telephone messages and relays of radio programs, became widespread in the 1920s and 1930s. Another use of radio in the pre-war years was the development of detection and locating of aircraft and ships by the use of radar (RAdio Detection And Ranging).
Today, radio takes many forms, including wireless networks and mobile communications of all types, as well as radio broadcasting. Before the advent of television, commercial radio broadcasts included not only news and music, but dramas, comedies, variety shows, and many other forms of entertainment (the era from the late 1920s to the mid-1950s is commonly called radio's "Golden Age"). Radio was unique among methods of dramatic presentation in that it used only sound. For more, see radio programming.
[edit] Audio




A Fisher 500 AM/FM hi-fi receiver from 1959.


AM radio uses amplitude modulation, in which the amplitude of the transmitted signal is made proportional to the sound amplitude captured (transduced) by the microphone, while the transmitted frequency remains unchanged. Transmissions are affected by static and interference because lightning and other sources of radio emissions on the same frequency add their amplitudes to the original transmitted amplitude.
In the early part of the 20th century, American AM radio stations broadcast with powers as high as 500kW, and some could be heard worldwide; these stations' transmitters were commandeered for military use by the US Government during World War II. Currently, the maximum broadcast power for a civilian AM radio station in the United States and Canada is 50kW, and the majority of stations that emit signals this powerful were grandfathered in (see List of 50 kW AM radio stations in the United States). In 1986 KTNN received the last granted 50,000 watt license. These 50kW stations are generally called "clear channel" stations (not to be confused with Clear Channel Communications), because within North America each of these stations has exclusive use of its broadcast frequency throughout part or all of the broadcast day.




Bush House,old home of the BBC World Service.


FM broadcast radio sends music and voice with higher fidelity than AM radio. In frequency modulation, amplitude variation at the microphone causes the transmitter frequency to fluctuate. Because the audio signal modulates the frequency and not the amplitude, an FM signal is not subject to static and interference in the same way as AM signals. Due to its need for a wider bandwidth, FM is transmitted in the Very High Frequency (VHF, 30MHz to 300MHz) radio spectrum.
VHF radio waves act more like light, traveling in straight lines; hence the reception range is generally limited to about 50200 miles. During unusual upper atmospheric conditions, FM signals are occasionally reflected back towards the Earth by the ionosphere, resulting in long distance FM reception. FM receivers are subject to the capture effect, which causes the radio to only receive the strongest signal when multiple signals appear on the same frequency. FM receivers are relatively immune to lightning and spark interference.
High power is useful in penetrating buildings, diffracting around hills, and refracting in the dense atmosphere near the horizon for some distance beyond the horizon. Consequently, 100,000 watt FM stations can regularly be heard up to 100 miles (160km) away, and farther (e.g., 150 miles, 240km) if there are no competing signals.
A few old, "grandfathered" stations do not conform to these power rules. WBCT-FM (93.7) in Grand Rapids, Michigan, US, runs 320,000 watts ERP, and can increase to 500,000 watts ERP by the terms of its original license. Such a huge power level does not usually help to increase range as much as one might expect, because VHF frequencies travel in nearly straight lines over the horizon and off into space. Nevertheless, when there were fewer FM stations competing, this station could be heard near Bloomington, Illinois, US, almost 300 miles (500km) away.[citation needed]
FM subcarrier services are secondary signals transmitted in a "piggyback" fashion along with the main program. Special receivers are required to utilize these services. Analog channels may contain alternative programming, such as reading services for the blind, background music or stereo sound signals. In some extremely crowded metropolitan areas, the sub-channel program might be an alternate foreign-language radio program for various ethnic groups. Sub-carriers can also transmit digital data, such as station identification, the current song's name, web addresses, or stock quotes. In some countries, FM radios automatically re-tune themselves to the same channel in a different district by using sub-bands.
Aviation voice radios use VHF AM. AM is used so that multiple stations on the same channel can be received. (Use of FM would result in stronger stations blocking out reception of weaker stations due to FM's capture effect). Aircraft fly high enough that their transmitters can be received hundreds of miles (or kilometres) away, even though they are using VHF.




Degen DE1103, an advanced world mini-receiver with single sideband modulation and dual conversion


Marine voice radios can use single sideband voice (SSB) in the shortwave High Frequency (HF3MHz to 30MHz) radio spectrum for very long ranges or narrowband FM in the VHF spectrum for much shorter ranges. Narrowband FM sacrifices fidelity to make more channels available within the radio spectrum, by using a smaller range of radio frequencies, usually with five kHz of deviation, versus the 75kHz used by commercial FM broadcasts, and 25kHz used for TV sound.
Government, police, fire and commercial voice services also use narrowband FM on special frequencies. Early police radios used AM receivers to receive one-way dispatches.
Civil and military HF (high frequency) voice services use shortwave radio to contact ships at sea, aircraft and isolated settlements. Most use single sideband voice (SSB), which uses less bandwidth than AM. On an AM radio SSB sounds like ducks quacking, or the adults in a Charlie Brown cartoon. Viewed as a graph of frequency versus power, an AM signal shows power where the frequencies of the voice add and subtract with the main radio frequency. SSB cuts the bandwidth in half by suppressing the carrier and one of the sidebands. This also makes the transmitter about three times more powerful, because it doesn't need to transmit the unused carrier and sideband.
TETRA, Terrestrial Trunked Radio is a digital cell phone system for military, police and ambulances. Commercial services such as XM, WorldSpace and Sirius offer encrypted digital Satellite radio.
[edit] Telephony
Mobile phones transmit to a local cell site (transmitter/receiver) that ultimately connects to the public switched telephone network (PSTN) through an optic fiber or microwave radio and other network elements. When the mobile phone nears the edge of the cell site's radio coverage area, the central computer switches the phone to a new cell. Cell phones originally used FM, but now most use various digital modulation schemes. Recent developments in Sweden (such as DROPme) allow for the instant downloading of digital material from a radio broadcast (such as a song) to a mobile phone.
Satellite phones use satellites rather than cell towers to communicate.
[edit] Video
Television sends the picture as AM and the sound as AM or FM, with the sound carrier a fixed frequency (4.5MHz in the NTSC system) away from the video carrier. Analog television also uses a vestigial sideband on the video carrier to reduce the bandwidth required.
Digital television uses 8VSB modulation in North America (under the ATSC digital television standard), and COFDM modulation elsewhere in the world (using the DVB-T standard). A ReedSolomon error correction code adds redundant correction codes and allows reliable reception during moderate data loss. Although many current and future codecs can be sent in the MPEG transport stream container format, as of 2006 most systems use a standard-definition format almost identical to DVD: MPEG-2 video in Anamorphic widescreen and MPEG layer 2 (MP2) audio. High-definition television is possible simply by using a higher-resolution picture, but H.264/AVC is being considered as a replacement video codec in some regions for its improved compression. With the compression and improved modulation involved, a single "channel" can contain a high-definition program and several standard-definition programs.
[edit] Navigation
All satellite navigation systems use satellites with precision clocks. The satellite transmits its position, and the time of the transmission. The receiver listens to four satellites, and can figure its position as being on a line that is tangent to a spherical shell around each satellite, determined by the time-of-flight of the radio signals from the satellite. A computer in the receiver does the math.
Radio direction-finding is the oldest form of radio navigation. Before 1960 navigators used movable loop antennas to locate commercial AM stations near cities. In some cases they used marine radiolocation beacons, which share a range of frequencies just above AM radio with amateur radio operators. LORAN systems also used time-of-flight radio signals, but from radio stations on the ground.
VOR (Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range), systems (used by aircraft), have an antenna array that transmits two signals simultaneously. A directional signal rotates like a lighthouse at a fixed rate. When the directional signal is facing north, an omnidirectional signal pulses. By measuring the difference in phase of these two signals, an aircraft can determine its bearing or radial from the station, thus establishing a line of position. An aircraft can get readings from two VORs and locate its position at the intersection of the two radials, known as a "fix."
When the VOR station is collocated with DME (Distance Measuring Equipment), the aircraft can determine its bearing and range from the station, thus providing a fix from only one ground station. Such stations are called VOR/DMEs. The military operates a similar system of navaids, called TACANs, which are often built into VOR stations. Such stations are called VORTACs. Because TACANs include distance measuring equipment, VOR/DME and VORTAC stations are identical in navigation potential to civil aircraft.
[edit] Radar
Radar (Radio Detection And Ranging) detects objects at a distance by bouncing radio waves off them. The delay caused by the echo measures the distance. The direction of the beam determines the direction of the reflection. The polarization and frequency of the return can sense the type of surface. Navigational radars scan a wide area two to four times per minute. They use very short waves that reflect from earth and stone. They are common on commercial ships and long-distance commercial aircraft.
General purpose radars generally use navigational radar frequencies, but modulate and polarize the pulse so the receiver can determine the type of surface of the reflector. The best general-purpose radars distinguish the rain of heavy storms, as well as land and vehicles. Some can superimpose sonar data and map data from GPS position.
Search radars scan a wide area with pulses of short radio waves. They usually scan the area two to four times a minute. Sometimes search radars use the Doppler effect to separate moving vehicles from clutter. Targeting radars use the same principle as search radar but scan a much smaller area far more often, usually several times a second or more. Weather radars resemble search radars, but use radio waves with circular polarization and a wavelength to reflect from water droplets. Some weather radar use the Doppler effect to measure wind speeds.
[edit] Data (digital radio)




2008 Pure One Classic digital radio


Most new radio systems are digital, see also: Digital TV, Satellite Radio, Digital Audio Broadcasting. The oldest form of digital broadcast was spark gap telegraphy, used by pioneers such as Marconi. By pressing the key, the operator could send messages in Morse code by energizing a rotating commutating spark gap. The rotating commutator produced a tone in the receiver, where a simple spark gap would produce a hiss, indistinguishable from static. Spark-gap transmitters are now illegal, because their transmissions span several hundred megahertz. This is very wasteful of both radio frequencies and power.
The next advance was continuous wave telegraphy, or CW (Continuous Wave), in which a pure radio frequency, produced by a vacuum tube electronic oscillator was switched on and off by a key. A receiver with a local oscillator would "heterodyne" with the pure radio frequency, creating a whistle-like audio tone. CW uses less than 100Hz of bandwidth. CW is still used, these days primarily by amateur radio operators (hams). Strictly, on-off keying of a carrier should be known as "Interrupted Continuous Wave" or ICW or on-off keying (OOK).
Radioteletype equipment usually operates on short-wave (HF) and is much loved by the military because they create written information without a skilled operator. They send a bit as one of two tones using frequency-shift keying. Groups of five or seven bits become a character printed by a teleprinter. From about 1925 to 1975, radioteletype was how most commercial messages were sent to less developed countries. These are still used by the military and weather services.
Aircraft use a 1200 Baud radioteletype service over VHF to send their ID, altitude and position, and get gate and connecting-flight data. Microwave dishes on satellites, telephone exchanges and TV stations usually use quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM). QAM sends data by changing both the phase and the amplitude of the radio signal. Engineers like QAM because it packs the most bits into a radio signal when given an exclusive (non-shared) fixed narrowband frequency range. Usually the bits are sent in "frames" that repeat. A special bit pattern is used to locate the beginning of a frame.




Modern GPS receivers.


Communication systems that limit themselves to a fixed narrowband frequency range are vulnerable to jamming. A variety of jamming-resistant spread spectrum techniques were initially developed for military use, most famously for Global Positioning System satellite transmissions. Commercial use of spread spectrum began in the 1980s. Bluetooth, most cell phones, and the 802.11b version of Wi-Fi each use various forms of spread spectrum.
Systems that need reliability, or that share their frequency with other services, may use "coded orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing" or COFDM. COFDM breaks a digital signal into as many as several hundred slower subchannels. The digital signal is often sent as QAM on the subchannels. Modern COFDM systems use a small computer to make and decode the signal with digital signal processing, which is more flexible and far less expensive than older systems that implemented separate electronic channels.
COFDM resists fading and ghosting because the narrow-channel QAM signals can be sent slowly. An adaptive system, or one that sends error-correction codes can also resist interference, because most interference can affect only a few of the QAM channels. COFDM is used for Wi-Fi, some cell phones, Digital Radio Mondiale, Eureka 147, and many other local area network, digital TV and radio standards.
[edit] Heating
Radio-frequency energy generated for heating of objects is generally not intended to radiate outside of the generating equipment, to prevent interference with other radio signals. Microwave ovens use intense radio waves to heat food. Diathermy equipment is used in surgery for sealing of blood vessels. Induction furnaces are used for melting metal for casting, and induction hobs for cooking.
[edit] Amateur radio service




Amateur radio station with multiple receivers and transceivers


Amateur radio, also known as "ham radio," is a hobby in which enthusiasts are licensed to communicate on a number of bands in the radio frequency spectrum non-commercially and for their own enjoyment. They may also provide emergency and public service assistance. This has been very beneficial in emergencies, saving lives in many instances.[37]
Radio amateurs use a variety of modes, including nostalgic ones like Morse code and experimental ones like Low-Frequency Experimental Radio. Several forms of radio were pioneered by radio amateurs and later became commercially important, including FM, single-sideband (SSB), AM, digital packet radio and satellite repeaters. Some amateur frequencies may be disrupted illegally by power-line internet service.
[edit] Unlicensed radio services
Unlicensed, government-authorized personal radio services such as Citizens' band radio in Australia, the US, and Europe, and Family Radio Service and Multi-Use Radio Service in North America exist to provide simple, (usually) short range communication for individuals and small groups, without the overhead of licensing. Similar services exist in other parts of the world. These radio services involve the use of handheld units.
Free radio stations, sometimes called pirate radio or "clandestine" stations, are unauthorized, unlicensed, illegal broadcasting stations. These are often low power transmitters operated on sporadic schedules by hobbyists, community activists, or political and cultural dissidents. Some pirate stations operating offshore in parts of Europe and the United Kingdom more closely resembled legal stations, maintaining regular schedules, using high power, and selling commercial advertising time.[38][39]
[edit] Radio control (RC)
Radio remote controls use radio waves to transmit control data to a remote object as in some early forms of guided missile, some early TV remotes and a range of model boats, cars and airplanes. Large industrial remote-controlled equipment such as cranes and switching locomotives now usually use digital radio techniques to ensure safety and reliability.
In Madison Square Garden, at the Electrical Exhibition of 1898, Nikola Tesla successfully demonstrated a radio-controlled boat.[40] He was awarded U.S. patent No. 613,809 for a "Method of and Apparatus for Controlling Mechanism of Moving Vessels or Vehicles."[41]
[edit] See also




Radio  portal



Main article: Outline of radio


Applications


Amateur radio
Citizens' band radio
Marine and mobile radio telephony
Marine VHF radio
Radio astronomy
Radio broadcasting

AM broadcasting
FM broadcasting
Campus radio
Old-time radio
Pirate radio
Radio programming

Radio documentary




Radio navigation

Radio direction finder
Direction finding


Wireless energy transfer


Radio science


Carrier current
Hertz
Types of radio emissions

Amplitude modulation
Frequency modulation
Longwave / Medium wave / Shortwave


Radio propagation and ionosphere


Radio technologies


Batteryless radio
Digital radio

Satellite radio


Radio software
Receiver (radio)

Crystal radio
Superheterodyne receiver
Transistor radio


Software-defined radio
Tuner (radio)


Alternatives


Cable FM
Free-space optical communication (FSO)
Internet radio
Power line communication


Other


Antique radio
History of radio

Years in radio
Timeline of radio




[edit] References

General information


A Histria da Rdio em Datas (1819-1997) (in Portuguese) - notes on etymology
L. de Forest, article in Electrical World 22 June 1270/1 (1907), early use of word "radio."
http://web.mit.edu/varun_ag/www/bose.html - It contains a proof that Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose invented the Mercury Coherer which was later used by Guglielmo Marconi and along with other patents.
Cheney, Margaret (1981). Tesla - Man Out of Time. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN978-0-7432-1536-7.


Footnotes



^ Dictionary of Electronics By Rudolf F. Graf (1974). Page 467.
^ http://www.radio-electronics.com/info/rf-technology-design/index.php Radio-Electronics, Radio Receiver Technology
^ The Electromagnetic Spectrum, University of Tennessee, Dept. of Physics and Astronomy
^ Clint Smith, Curt Gervelis (2003). Wireless Network Performance Handbook. McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN0-07-140655-7. http://books.google.com/books?id=nZAVGBoPevUC&pg=PA25&lr=&as_brr=3&ei=F4-sSKuzO6XmtgO4393BBA&sig=ACfU3U0g0vtYCOzP0LCCzdRfr7bgKwvTNg#PPA24,M1.
^ Macario, R. C. V. (1996). Modern personal radio systems. IEE telecommunications series, 33. London: Institution of Electrical Engineers. Page 3.
^ R. K. Puri (2004). Solid State Physics and Electronics. S. Chand. ISBN81-219-1475-2. http://books.google.com/books?id=4mmzW0IT6JwC&pg=RA1-PA514&dq=%22radio+communication+system%22+definition&lr=&as_brr=3&ei=LousSKT9Noa2tgOUtpXEBA&sig=ACfU3U3iFs0FzCamdZGWy-eglKfVjuXnAA#PRA1-PA515,M1.
^ Edison, his life and inventions By Frank Lewis Dyer, Thomas Commerford Martin. Page 830.
^ IEEEVM: Nikola Tesla
^ K. Corum; J. Corum. "Tesla's Colorado Springs Receivers" (PDF). http://www.teslasociety.com/teslarec.pdf. Retrieved 2009-07-22.
^   - . . XXVII. . 8. . 259   1895
^  . .    .  , 1895. . 460
^ Rzhosnitsky B. N. Dmitry Aleksandrovich Lachinov. Moscow-Leningrad: Gosenergoizdat, 1955 /  . .   .  ..: , 1955 (Russian)
^ "U.S. Supreme Court". http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=320&invol=1. Retrieved 2012-04-23.
^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1909- Guglielmo Marconi, Ferdinand Braun". http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1909/marconi-bio.html.
^ Marconi's late-1895 transmission of signals was for around a mile (1.6 km). This was small compared to Tesla's early-1895 transmissions of up to 50 miles. For more see "Nikola Tesla On His Work with Alternating Currents and Their Application to Wireless Telegraphy, Telephony, and Transmission of Power," Leland I. Anderson, Twenty First Century Books, 2002, pp. 26-27.
^ "Guglielmo Marconi - The father of long distance radio communication - An engineer's tribute". http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/Xplore/login.jsp?url=http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/iel5/4137114/4137241/04137304.pdf%3Farnumber%3D4137304&authDecision=-203.
^ "La Radio. La vera storia di un'invenzione incompresa," by Lodovico Gualandi. Page 191
^ a b The Saturday review of politics, literature, science and art, Volume 93. "THE INVENTOR OF WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY: A REPLY. To the Editor of the Saturday Review" Guglielmo Marconi and "WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY: A REJOINDER. To the Editor of the Saturday Review," Silvanus P. Thompson.
^ Fleming, Sir John Ambrose (1906). The principles of electric wave telegraphy. Longmans, Green, and Co.. pp.601606. http://books.google.com/?id=LABVAAAAMAAJ&lpg=PR18&pg=PA601#v=onepage&q&f=false. Retrieved 2010-11-19.
^ "MARCONI E LO STRAVOLGIMENTO DELLA VERIT STORICA SULLA SUA OPERA". http://www.radiomarconi.com/marconi/stravolgimento1.html.
^ Proceedings of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, Volume 28 By Institution of Electrical Engineers. page 294.
^ United States Naval Institute, Proceedings of the United States Naval Institute. The Institute, 1899. Page 857.
^ "Father Roberto Landell de Moura". highfields-arc.co.uk. http://highfields-arc.co.uk/biogs/rldemoura.htm.
^ a b c "Radio Broadcasting". W2uc.union.edu. http://w2uc.union.edu/RADIO_web.htm. Retrieved 2009-07-22.
^ "Union College Magazine". 2000.union.edu. http://2000.union.edu/N/DS/edition_display.php?e=677&s=2700. Retrieved 2009-07-22.
^ Sciullo Jr, Sam, ed. (1991). 1991 Pitt Football: University of Pittsburgh Football Media Guide. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Sports Information Office. p.116
^ Marconi Wireless Tel. Co. v. United States, 320 U.S. 1 (U.S. 1943)," 320 U.S. 1, 63 S. Ct. 1393, 87 L. Ed. 1731 Argued April 9,12, 1943. Decided June 21, 1943.
^ MARCONI WIRELESS T. CO. OF AMERICA v. U.S., 320 U.S. 1 (1943)
^ Intellectual property law for engineers and scientists. Wiley-IEEEs. 2004-05-24. ISBN978-0-471-44998-0. http://books.google.com/?id=6B88P-32IIQC&pg=PA198&lpg=PA198&dq=patent+number+763,772#v=onepage&q&f=false.
^ "The Guglielmo Marconi Case: Who is the True Inventor of Radio?". Ham Radio India. http://tesla.hamradioindia.com/teslamarc.html.
^ "INTERESTING FACTS ABOUT NIKOLA TESLA". 21st Century Books. http://www.tfcbooks.com/teslafaq/questions.htm#A-022.
^ "U.S. Supreme Court". http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=320&invol=1. Retrieved 2012-04-23.
^ Icons of invention: the makers of the modern world from Gutenberg to Gates. ABC-CLIO. http://books.google.com/books?id=WKuG-VIwID8C&pg=PA161&dq=British+High+Court+upheld+patent+7777&hl=en&ei=8hc_TujkFubb0QGUvantAw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CC0Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false. Retrieved 07-08-2011.
^ AM stations are still marked on U.S. aviation charts
^ "Transistor Radios". ScienCentral. 1999. http://www.pbs.org/transistor/background1/events/tradio.html. Retrieved 2010-01-19.
^ "The History Of KQW Radio - KCBS". Bayarearadio.org. http://www.bayarearadio.org/schneider/kqw.shtml. Retrieved 2009-07-22.
^ "Amateur Radio "Saved Lives" in South Asia". Arrl.org. 2004-12-29. Archived from the original on 2007-10-13. http://web.archive.org/web/20071013184249/http://www.arrl.org/news/stories/2004/12/29/100/?nc=1.
^ Free radio: electronic civil disobedience by Lawrence C. Soley. Published by Westview Press, 1998. ISBN 0-8133-9064-8, ISBN 978-0-8133-9064-2
^ Rebel Radio: The Full Story of British Pirate Radio by John Hind, Stephen Mosco. Published by Pluto Press, 1985. ISBN 0-7453-0055-3, ISBN 978-0-7453-0055-9
^ "Tesla - Master of Lightning: Remote Control". PBS. http://www.pbs.org/tesla/ins/lab_remotec.html. Retrieved 2009-07-22.
^ "Tesla - Master of Lightning: Selected Tesla Patents". PBS. http://www.pbs.org/tesla/res/613809.html. Retrieved 2009-07-22.


[edit] Further reading

Sewall, C. H. (1904). Wireless telegraphy: its origins, development, inventions, and apparatus. New York: D. Van Nostrand.
Mills, J. (1917). Radio communication, theory and methods, with an appendix on transmission over wires. New York: McGraw-Hill book company [etc., etc.].
Lauer, H., & Brown, H. L. (1920). Radio engineering principles. New York: McGraw-Hill book company; [etc., etc.].
Cockaday, L. M. (1922). Radio-telephony for everyone; the wireless: how to construct and maintain modern transmitting and receiving apparatus. New York: Frederick A. Stokes.
Hausmann, E., Goldsmith, A. N., Hazeltine, L. A., Hogan, J. V. L., Morecroft, J. H., Canavaciol, F. E., et al. (1922). Radio phone receiving; a practical book for everybody. New York: D. Van Nostrand.
Buga, N.; Falko A., Chistyakov N.I. (1990) Chistyakov N.I. ed. Radio Receiver Theory Translated from the Russian by Boris V. Kuznetsov Moscow: Mir Publishers ISBN5-03-001321-0First published in Russian as  
Da Silva, E. (2001). High frequency and microwave engineering. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Clint Smith, Curt Gervelis (2003). Wireless Network Performance Handbook. McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN0-07-140655-7. http://books.google.com/books?id=nZAVGBoPevUC&pg=PA25&lr=&as_brr=3&ei=F4-sSKuzO6XmtgO4393BBA&sig=ACfU3U0g0vtYCOzP0LCCzdRfr7bgKwvTNg#PPA24,M1.
Hugh G. J. Aitkin: The Continuous Wave: Technology and the American Radio, 1900-1932 (Princeton University Press, 1985).
Asa Briggs: The History of Broadcasting in the United Kingdom (Oxford University Press, 1961).
John Dunning: On the Air. The Encyclopedia of Old-Time Radio. New York; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-19-507678-8
Henry Ewbank and Sherman P. Lawton: Broadcasting: Radio and Television (Harper & Brothers, 1952).
Marc Fisher: Something In The Air: Radio, Rock, and the Revolution That Shaped A Generation (Random House, 2007).
Leland I. Anderson (ed.), "John Stone Stone, Nikola Tesla's Priority in Radio and Continuous-Wave Radiofrequency Apparatus." The AWA Review, Vol. 1. 1986. 24 pages, illustrated.
Tom Lewis: Empire of the Air: The Men Who Made Radio, 1st ed., New York: E. Burlingame Books, 1991. ISBN 0-06-018215-6. "Empire of the Air: The Men Who Made Radio" (1992) by Ken Burns was a PBS documentary based on the book.
W. Rupert Maclaurin: Invention and Innovation in the Radio Industry (The Macmillan Company, 1949).
William B. Ray: FCC: The Ups and Downs of Radio-TV Regulation (Iowa State University Press, 1990).
Alexander Russo: Points on the Dial: Golden Age Radio Beyond the Networks (Duke University Press; 2010) 278 pages; discusses regional and local radio as forms that "complicate" the image of the medium as a national unifier from the 1920s to the 1950s.
Scannell, Paddy, and Cardiff, David. A Social History of British Broadcasting, Volume One, 1922-1939 (Basil Blackwell, 1991).
Schwoch James. The American Radio Industry and Its Latin American Activities, 1900-1939 (University of Illinois Press, 1990).
Christopher H. Sterling with Michael C. Keith (ed.): Encyclopedia of Radio. New York; London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 2004 (three vols.)
Llewellyn White: The American Radio (University of Chicago Press, 1947).
Ulrich L. Rohde, Jerry Whitaker: Communications Receivers, Third Edition, McGraw Hill, New York, NY, 2001, ISBN 0-07-136121-9.

[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Radio





Look up radio in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



General


Radio at the Open Directory Project
"It's Radi-O! Essay by Richard Rubin, The Atlantic Monthly, January 1998.
Listen To Radio Online A way to listen radio.


History


U.S. Supreme Court, "Marconi Wireless Telegraph co. of America v. United States." 320 U.S. 1. Nos. 369, 373. Argued 912 April 1943. Decided 21 June 1943.
"Who Invented Radio?" Buzzle.com Date unknown. retrieved 20 January 2011.
Steven Schoenherr's History of Radio
The Broadcast Archive - Radio History on the Web! Retrieved 20 January 2011.
Canadian Communications Foundation - The History on Canadian Broadcasting - 1920 onward. Retrieved 20 January 2011.
United States Early Radio History -1897 to 1927. Retrieved 20 January 2011.
Historic Radios from Around the World at Kurrajong Radio Museum, Australia - a private collection. Retrieved 20 January 2011.


Antiques


George H. Clark Radioana Collection, ca. 1880 - 1950 - Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution
A gallery of Antiques from the 1920s to the 1960s


Technical


Radio Frequency Chart National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA).
IAteacher: Interactive Explanation of Radio Receiver Construction
How Stuff Works - Radio
VOR Basic Information
Dr. Phil's Receiver Designs Single-Triode and Single-Transistor Regenerative Radio Designs
How to design a traditional radio by Natalian Zhai, Silicon Labs


DX


The British DX Club
World of Radio Glenn Hauser's internationally known DX radio show










v
t
e


International Morse code






Transmission methods



Electrical telegraph
On-off keying
Continuous wave
Modulated continuous wave
Heliograph
Signal lamp








Notable signals



SOS
CQD
Morse code mnemonics
Prosigns for Morse code
Morse code abbreviations
Q code
Z code








Other writing systems
in Morse code



American Morse code
Greek Alphabet
Cyrillic Alphabet
Hebrew Alphabet
Arabic Alphabet
Wabun code
Chinese telegraph code
















v
t
e


Telecommunications






History



Beacons
Broadcasting
Communications satellites
Computer networks
Drums
Electrical telegraphs
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraphs
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phones
Optical telegraphy
Photophones
Radio
Radiotelephones
Smoke signals
Telegraphy
Telephones
The Telephone Cases
Television
Undersea telegraph lines
Videotelephony











Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Lee De Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Guglielmo Marconi
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Papin Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin








Transmission media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Telephone lines
Terrestrial microwave








Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Packet switched
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








Geographic







v
t
e


Telecommunications in Africa






Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Cte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
So Tom and Prncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe








States with limited
recognition



Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland








Dependencies and
other territories



Canary Islands/ Ceuta/ Melilla/ Plazas de soberana(Spain)
Madeira(Portugal)
Mayotte/ Runion(France)
Saint Helena/ Ascension Island/ Tristan da Cunha(United Kingdom)
Western Sahara










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Asia






Sovereign
states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
People's Republic of China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan








Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Europe






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria








Dependencies and
other territories



land
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard








Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Telecommunications in North America






Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States








Dependencies and
other territories



Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Navassa Island
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthlemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Telecommunications in Oceania






Sovereign states



Australia
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu








Dependencies and
other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cook Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Niue
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Telecommunications in South America






Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela








Dependencies and
other territories



Aruba
Bonaire
Curaao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands



















v
t
e


Analog and digital audio broadcasting






Terrestrial





Radio modulation




AM
FM
COFDM









Frequency allocations




LW (LF)
MW (MF)
SW (HF)
VHF (low / mid / high)
L band (UHF)









Digital systems




CAM-D
DAB/DAB+
DRM/DRM+
FMeXtra
HD Radio











Satellite





Frequency allocations




C band
Ku band
L band
S band









Digital systems




ADR
DAB-S
DVB-SH
S-DMB
SDR









Commercial radio providers




1worldspace
Sirius XM
Sirius XM Canada











Codecs



AAC
AMR-WB+
HE-AAC
MPEG-1 Audio Layer II








Subcarrier signals



AMSS
DirectBand
PAD
RDS/RBDS
SCA/SCMO













Related topics







Technical (audio)




Audio data compression
Audio signal processing









Technical (AM stereo formats)




Belar
C-QUAM
Harris
Kahn-Hazeltine
Magnavox









Technical (emission)




AM broadcasting
AM expanded band
Cable radio
Digital radio
Error detection and correction
FM broadcast band
FM broadcasting
Multipath propagation
Shortwave relay station









Cultural




History of radio
International broadcasting











Comparison of radio systems



















v
t
e


Media culture






Media



Mass media
Mainstream media
News media
News broadcasting
News cycle
Radio
Cinema
Tv
Internet








Ideology



Mainstream
Consumerism
Pop music
Spectacle (critical theory)
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Pense unique
Bipartisanship








Deception





Forms




Public relations
Advertising
Propaganda
Spin (public relations)
Tabloid journalism









Techniques




Framing (social sciences)
Recuperation (politics)
Narcotizing dysfunction
Sensationalism
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Media circus
Pseudo-event









Others




Crowd manipulation
Media manipulation
Managing the news











Philosophers



Walter Lippmann
Edward Bernays
Theodor Adorno
Marshall McLuhan
Guy Debord








Counterculture



Political satire
Punk
Culture jamming
Graffiti
Occupation (protest)
Demonstration (people)
Protest
Civil disobedience
Boycott
Strike action








In academia



Media studies
Media influence
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd








Various issues



Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy
Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership








Media culture synonyms



Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle











By period



1920sMedia culture





v
t
e









Collective imaginary



Flapper
Betty Boop
Modern girl
Torches of Freedom
Cosmetics in the 1920s








Theoreticians



Walter Lippmann
Edward Bernays








Other topics



Tad Dorgan
Federal Radio Commission








1930s topics



Mohawk Valley formula
Remington Rand strike of 19361937

















 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 34849/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 67992/1500000
Post-expand include size: 400860/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 225948/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 28/40
Expensive parser function count: 17/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:15368428-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20121224035127 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radio&oldid=529534091"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: RadioBritish inventionsHidden categories: Articles with Russian language external linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from December 2012Articles with disputed statements from February 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2008Commons category template with no category set  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 