
Reynolds number
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 




A vortex street around a cylinder. This occurs around cylinders, for any fluid, cylinder size and fluid speed, provided that there is a Reynolds number of between ~40 and 103.[1]


In fluid mechanics, the Reynolds number (Re) is a dimensionless number that gives a measure of the ratio of inertial forces to viscous forces and consequently quantifies the relative importance of these two types of forces for given flow conditions. (The term inertial forces, which characterize how much a particular fluid resists any change in motion, are not to be confused with inertial forces defined in the classical way.)
The concept was introduced by George Gabriel Stokes in 1851,[2] but the Reynolds number is named after Osborne Reynolds (18421912), who popularized its use in 1883.[3][4]
Reynolds numbers frequently arise when performing dimensional analysis of fluid dynamics problems, and as such can be used to determine dynamic similitude between different experimental cases.
They are also used to characterize different flow regimes, such as laminar or turbulent flow: laminar flow occurs at low Reynolds numbers, where viscous forces are dominant, and is characterized by smooth, constant fluid motion; turbulent flow occurs at high Reynolds numbers and is dominated by inertial forces, which tend to produce chaotic eddies, vortices and other flow instabilities.




Contents


1 Definition

1.1 Flow in pipe
1.2 Flow in a wide duct
1.3 Flow in an open channel
1.4 Flow around Airfoils
1.5 Object in a fluid

1.5.1 In viscous fluids
1.5.2 Sphere in a fluid
1.5.3 Oblong object in a fluid
1.5.4 Fall velocity


1.6 Packed bed
1.7 Stirred vessel


2 Transition and turbulent flow
3 Pipe friction
4 Similarity of flows
5 Smallest scales of turbulent motion
6 In physiology
7 Derivation
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links




[edit] Definition
Reynolds number can be defined for a number of different situations where a fluid is in relative motion to a surface.[n 1] These definitions generally include the fluid properties of density and viscosity, plus a velocity and a characteristic length or characteristic dimension. This dimension is a matter of convention for example a radius or diameter are equally valid for spheres or circles, but one is chosen by convention. For aircraft or ships, the length or width can be used. For flow in a pipe or a sphere moving in a fluid the internal diameter is generally used today. Other shapes such as rectangular pipes or non-spherical objects have an equivalent diameter defined. For fluids of variable density such as compressible gases or fluids of variable viscosity such as non-Newtonian fluids, special rules apply. The velocity may also be a matter of convention in some circumstances, notably stirred vessels. With these conventions, the Reynolds number is defined as

[5]

where:

 is the mean velocity of the object relative to the fluid (SI units: m/s)
 is a characteristic linear dimension, (travelled length of the fluid; hydraulic diameter when dealing with river systems) (m)
 is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid (Pas or Ns/m or kg/(ms))
 is the kinematic viscosity () (m/s)
 is the density of the fluid (kg/m).

Note that multiplying the Reynolds number by  yields , which is the ratio of the inertial forces to the viscous forces.[6] It could also be considered the ratio of the total momentum transfer to the molecular momentum transfer.
[edit] Flow in pipe
For flow in a pipe or tube, the Reynolds number is generally defined as:[7]



where:

 is the hydraulic diameter of the pipe; its characteristic travelled length, , (m).
 is the volumetric flow rate (m3/s).
 is the pipe cross-sectional area (m).
 is the mean velocity of the fluid (SI units: m/s).
 is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid (Pas or Ns/m or kg/(ms)).
 is the kinematic viscosity ( (m/s).
 is the density of the fluid (kg/m).

For shapes such as squares, rectangular or annular ducts where the height and width are comparable, the characteristic dimension for internal flow situations is taken to be the hydraulic diameter, , defined as:



where A is the cross-sectional area and P is the wetted perimeter. The wetted perimeter for a channel is the total perimeter of all channel walls that are in contact with the flow.[8] This means the length of the channel exposed to air is not included in the wetted perimeter.
For a circular pipe, the hydraulic diameter is exactly equal to the inside pipe diameter, as can be shown mathematically.
For an annular duct, such as the outer channel in a tube-in-tube heat exchanger, the hydraulic diameter can be shown algebraically to reduce to



where

 is the inside diameter of the outside pipe, and
 is the outside diameter of the inside pipe.

For calculations involving flow in non-circular ducts, the hydraulic diameter can be substituted for the diameter of a circular duct, with reasonable accuracy.
[edit] Flow in a wide duct
For a fluid moving between two plane parallel surfaceswhere the width is much greater than the space between the platesthen the characteristic dimension is twice the distance between the plates.[9]
[edit] Flow in an open channel
For flow of liquid with a free surface, the hydraulic radius must be determined. This is the cross-sectional area of the channel divided by the wetted perimeter. For a semi-circular channel, it is half the radius. For a rectangular channel, the hydraulic radius is the cross-sectional area divided by the wetted perimeter. Some texts then use a characteristic dimension that is four times the hydraulic radius, chosen because it gives the same value of Re for the onset of turbulence as in pipe flow,[10] while others use the hydraulic radius as the characteristic length-scale with consequently different values of Re for transition and turbulent flow.
[edit] Flow around Airfoils
Reynolds numbers are used in Airfoil design to (among other things) manage "Scale Effect" when computing/comparing characteristics (a tiny wing, scaled to be huge, will perform differently).[11] Fluid dynamicists define the chord Reynolds number, R, like this: R = Vc / v where V is the flight speed, c is the chord, and v is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid in which the airfoil operates. When V is meters/sec, and c is meters, v at sea level is 1.460x105 m2/s [12]
[edit] Object in a fluid




Qualitative behaviors of fluid flow over a cylinder depends to a large extent on Reynolds number; similar flow patterns often appear when the shape and Reynolds number is matched, although other parameters like surface roughness have a big effect


The Reynolds number for an object in a fluid, called the particle Reynolds number and often denoted Rep, is important when considering the nature of flow around that grain, whether or not vortex shedding will occur, and its fall velocity.
[edit] In viscous fluids




Creeping flow past a sphere: streamlines, drag force Fd and force by gravity Fg.


Where the viscosity is naturally high, such as polymer solutions and polymer melts, flow is normally laminar. The Reynolds number is very small and Stokes' Law can be used to measure the viscosity of the fluid. Spheres are allowed to fall through the fluid and they reach the terminal velocity quickly, from which the viscosity can be determined.
The laminar flow of polymer solutions is exploited by animals such as fish and dolphins, who exude viscous solutions from their skin to aid flow over their bodies while swimming. It has been used in yacht racing by owners who want to gain a speed advantage by pumping a polymer solution such as low molecular weight polyoxyethylene in water, over the wetted surface of the hull.
It is, however, a problem for mixing of polymers, because turbulence is needed to distribute fine filler (for example) through the material. Inventions such as the "cavity transfer mixer" have been developed to produce multiple folds into a moving melt so as to improve mixing efficiency. The device can be fitted onto extruders to aid mixing.
[edit] Sphere in a fluid
For a sphere in a fluid, the characteristic length-scale is the diameter of the sphere and the characteristic velocity is that of the sphere relative to the fluid some distance away from the sphere, such that the motion of the sphere does not disturb that reference parcel of fluid. The density and viscosity are those belonging to the fluid.[13] Note that purely laminar flow only exists up to Re = 0.1 under this definition.
Under the condition of low Re, the relationship between force and speed of motion is given by Stokes' law.[14]
[edit] Oblong object in a fluid
The equation for an oblong object is identical to that of a sphere, with the object being approximated as an ellipsoid and the axis of length being chosen as the characteristic length scale. Such considerations are important in natural streams, for example, where there are few perfectly spherical grains. For grains in which measurement of each axis is impractical, sieve diameters are used instead as the characteristic particle length-scale. Both approximations alter the values of the critical Reynolds number.
[edit] Fall velocity
The particle Reynolds number is important in determining the fall velocity of a particle. When the particle Reynolds number indicates laminar flow, Stokes' law can be used to calculate its fall velocity. When the particle Reynolds number indicates turbulent flow, a turbulent drag law must be constructed to model the appropriate settling velocity.
[edit] Packed bed
For fluid flow through a bed of approximately spherical particles of diameter D in contact, if the "voidage" is  and the "superficial velocity" is V, the Reynolds number can be defined as:



Laminar conditions apply up to Re = 10, fully turbulent from 2000.[13]
[edit] Stirred vessel
In a cylindrical vessel stirred by a central rotating paddle, turbine or propeller, the characteristic dimension is the diameter of the agitator . The velocity is  where  is the rotational speed. Then the Reynolds number is:



The system is fully turbulent for values of Re above 10 000.[15]
[edit] Transition and turbulent flow
In boundary layer flow over a flat plate, experiments confirm that, after a certain length of flow, a laminar boundary layer will become unstable and turbulent. This instability occurs across different scales and with different fluids, usually when ,[16] where  is the distance from the leading edge of the flat plate, and the flow velocity is the freestream velocity of the fluid outside the boundary layer.
For flow in a pipe of diameter , experimental observations show that for "fully developed" flow,[n 2] laminar flow occurs when  and turbulent flow occurs when .[17] In the interval between 2300 and 4000, laminar and turbulent flows are possible and are called "transition" flows, depending on other factors, such as pipe roughness and flow uniformity. This result is generalized to non-circular channels using the hydraulic diameter, allowing a transition Reynolds number to be calculated for other shapes of channel.
These transition Reynolds numbers are also called critical Reynolds numbers, and were studied by Osborne Reynolds around 1895.[4]
[edit] Pipe friction




The Moody diagram, which describes the DarcyWeisbach friction factor f as a function of the Reynolds number and relative pipe roughness.


Pressure drops seen for fully developed flow of fluids through pipes can be predicted using the Moody diagram which plots the DarcyWeisbach friction factor  against Reynolds number  and relative roughness . The diagram clearly shows the laminar, transition, and turbulent flow regimes as Reynolds number increases. The nature of pipe flow is strongly dependent on whether the flow is laminar or turbulent
[edit] Similarity of flows
In order for two flows to be similar they must have the same geometry, and have equal Reynolds numbers and Euler numbers. When comparing fluid behavior at corresponding points in a model and a full-scale flow, the following holds:






quantities marked with 'm' concern the flow around the model and the others the actual flow. This allows engineers to perform experiments with reduced models in water channels or wind tunnels, and correlate the data to the actual flows, saving on costs during experimentation and on lab time. Note that true dynamic similitude may require matching other dimensionless numbers as well, such as the Mach number used in compressible flows, or the Froude number that governs open-channel flows. Some flows involve more dimensionless parameters than can be practically satisfied with the available apparatus and fluids, so one is forced to decide which parameters are most important. For experimental flow modeling to be useful, it requires a fair amount of experience and judgement of the engineer.
[edit] Smallest scales of turbulent motion
In a turbulent flow, there is a range of scales of the time-varying fluid motion. The size of the largest scales of fluid motion (sometimes called eddies) are set by the overall geometry of the flow. For instance, in an industrial smoke stack, the largest scales of fluid motion are as big as the diameter of the stack itself. The size of the smallest scales is set by the Reynolds number. As the Reynolds number increases, smaller and smaller scales of the flow are visible. In a smoke stack, the smoke may appear to have many very small velocity perturbations or eddies, in addition to large bulky eddies. In this sense, the Reynolds number is an indicator of the range of scales in the flow. The higher the Reynolds number, the greater the range of scales. The largest eddies will always be the same size; the smallest eddies are determined by the Reynolds number.
What is the explanation for this phenomenon? A large Reynolds number indicates that viscous forces are not important at large scales of the flow. With a strong predominance of inertial forces over viscous forces, the largest scales of fluid motion are undampedthere is not enough viscosity to dissipate their motions. The kinetic energy must "cascade" from these large scales to progressively smaller scales until a level is reached for which the scale is small enough for viscosity to become important (that is, viscous forces become of the order of inertial ones). It is at these small scales where the dissipation of energy by viscous action finally takes place. The Reynolds number indicates at what scale this viscous dissipation occurs.
[edit] In physiology
Poiseuille's law on blood circulation in the body is dependent on laminar flow. In turbulent flow the flow rate is proportional to the square root of the pressure gradient, as opposed to its direct proportionality to pressure gradient in laminar flow.
Using the definition of the Reynolds number we can see that a large diameter with rapid flow, where the density of the blood is high, tends towards turbulence. Rapid changes in vessel diameter may lead to turbulent flow, for instance when a narrower vessel widens to a larger one. Furthermore, a bulge of atheroma may be the cause of turbulent flow, where audible turbulence may be detected with a stethoscope.
[edit] Derivation
The Reynolds number can be obtained when one uses the nondimensional form of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations:



Each term in the above equation has the units of a "body force" (force per unit volume) or, equivalently, an acceleration times a density. Each term is thus dependent on the exact measurements of a flow. When one renders the equation nondimensional, that is when we multiply it by a factor with inverse units of the base equation, we obtain a form which does not depend directly on the physical sizes. One possible way to obtain a nondimensional equation is to multiply the whole equation by the following factor:



where:

 is the mean velocity,  or , relative to the fluid (m/s).
 is the characteristic length, , (m).
 is the fluid density (kg/m).

If we now set:



we can rewrite the Navier-Stokes equation without dimensions:



where the term 
Finally, dropping the primes for ease of reading:



This is why mathematically all flows with the same Reynolds number are comparable. Notice also, in the above equation, as  the viscous terms vanish. Thus, high Reynolds number flows are approximately inviscid in the free-stream.
[edit] See also

Reynolds transport theorem
Drag coefficient
Deposition (geology)

[edit] Notes


^ The definition of the Reynolds number is not to be confused with the Reynolds equation or lubrication equation.
^ Full development of the flow occurs as the flow enters the pipe, the boundary layer thickens and then stabilizes after several diameters distance into the pipe.


[edit] References

^ Tansley, Claire E.; Marshall, David P. (2001). "Flow past a Cylinder on a Plane, with Application to Gulf Stream Separation and the Antarctic Circumpolar Current". Journal of Physical Oceanography 31: 32743283. http://www.met.reading.ac.uk/~ocean/Dynamics/pub/tm01b.pdf.
^ Stokes, George (1851). "On the Effect of the Internal Friction of Fluids on the Motion of Pendulums". Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 9: 8106. Bibcode 1851TCaPS...9....8S.
^ Reynolds, Osborne (1883). "An experimental investigation of the circumstances which determine whether the motion of water shall be direct or sinuous, and of the law of resistance in parallel channels". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 174 (0): 935982. doi:10.1098/rstl.1883.0029. JSTOR109431.
^ a b Rott, N. (1990). "Note on the history of the Reynolds number". Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 22 (1): 111. Bibcode 1990AnRFM..22....1R. doi:10.1146/annurev.fl.22.010190.000245.
^ Reynolds Number
^ Batchelor, G. K. (1967). An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics. Cambridge University Press. pp.211215.
^ Reynolds Number Engineeringtoolbox.com
^ Holman, J. P.. Heat Transfer. McGraw Hill.[full citation needed]
^ Fox, R. W.; McDonald, A. T.; Pritchard, Phillip J. (2004). Introduction to Fluid Mechanics (6th ed.). Hoboken: John Wiley and Sons. p.348. ISBN0-471-20231-2.
^ Streeter, V. L. (1962). Fluid Mechanics (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
^ Low-Reynolds-Number Airfoils, P.B.S. Lissaman, AeroVironment Inc., Pasadena, California, 91107
^ ISO. "Internation Standard Atmosphere". eng.cam.ac.uk. http://www-mdp.eng.cam.ac.uk/web/library/enginfo/aerothermal_dvd_only/aero/atmos/atmos.html.
^ a b Rhodes, M. (1989). Introduction to Particle Technology. Wiley. ISBN0-471-98482-5. http://books.google.com/books?id=P9Qgvh7kMP8C&pg=PA29.
^ Dusenbery, David B. (2009). Living at Micro Scale. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press. p.49. ISBN978-0-674-03116-6.
^ Sinnott, R. K.. Coulson & Richardson's Chemical Engineering, Volume 6: Chemical Engineering Design (4th ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann. p.73. ISBN0-7506-6538-6.
^ De Witt, D. P. (1990). Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer. New York: Wiley.
^ Holman, J. P. (2002). Heat Transfer. McGraw-Hill. p.207.

[edit] Further reading

Zagarola, M.V. and Smits, A.J., Experiments in High Reynolds Number Turbulent Pipe Flow. AIAApaper #96-0654, 34th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, Nevada, January 1518, 1996.
Jermy M., Fluid Mechanics A Course Reader, Mechanical Engineering Dept., University of Canterbury, 2005, pp. d5.10.
Hughes, Roger "Civil Engineering Hydraulics," Civil and Environmental Dept., University of Melbourne 1997, pp.107152
Fouz, Infaz "Fluid Mechanics," Mechanical Engineering Dept., University of Oxford, 2001, pp96
E.M. Purcell. "Life at Low Reynolds Number", American Journal of Physics vol 45, p.3-11 (1977)[1]
Truskey, G.A., Yuan, F, Katz, D.F. (2004). Transport Phenomena in Biological Systems Prentice Hall, pp.7. ISBN 0-13-042204-5. ISBN 978-0-13-042204-0.

[edit] External links

Gas Dynamics Toolbox Calculate Reynolds number for mixtures of gases using VHS model
Browser-based Reynolds number calculator.
University of Nottingham video about the Reynolds number









v
t
e


Dimensionless numbers in fluid dynamics









Archimedes
Atwood
Bagnold
Bejan
Biot
Bond
Brinkman
Capillary
Cauchy
Damkhler
Dean
Deborah
Eckert
Ekman
Etvs
Euler
Froude
Galilei
Graetz
Grashof
Grtler
Hagen
KeuleganCarpenter
Knudsen
Laplace
Lewis
Mach
Marangoni
Morton
Nusselt
Ohnesorge
Pclet
Prandtl (magnetic
turbulent)
Rayleigh
Reynolds (magnetic)
Richardson
Roshko
Rossby
Rouse
Ruark
Schmidt
Sherwood
Shields
Stanton
Stokes
Strouhal
Stuart
Suratman
Taylor
Ursell
Weber
Weissenberg
Womersley








 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 8823/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 33514/1500000
Post-expand include size: 44223/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 16795/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/40
Expensive parser function count: 1/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:23868856-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130125114907 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reynolds_number&oldid=534809789"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: AerodynamicsConvectionDimensionless numbers of fluid mechanicsDimensionless numbers of thermodynamicsFluid dynamicsPipingHidden categories: All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from November 2012  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 