
Ring network
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2007) 






Image showing ring network layout


A ring network is a network topology in which each node connects to exactly two other nodes, forming a single continuous pathway for signals through each node - a ring. Data travels from node to node, with each node along the way handling every packet.
Because a ring topology provides only one pathway between any two nodes, ring networks may be disrupted by the failure of a single link.[1] A node failure or cable break might isolate every node attached to the ring.
FDDI networks overcome this vulnerability by sending data on a clockwise and a counterclockwise ring: in the event of a break data is wrapped back onto the complementary ring before it reaches the end of the cable, maintaining a path to every node along the resulting "C-Ring".
Many ring networks add a "counter-rotating ring" to form a redundant topology. Such "dual ring" networks include Spatial Reuse Protocol, Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI), and Resilient Packet Ring.
802.5 networks -- also known as IBM Token Ring networksavoid the weakness of a ring topology altogether: they actually use a star topology at the physical layer and a Multistation Access Unit (MAU) to imitate a ring at the datalink layer.




Contents


1 Advantages
2 Disadvantages
3 Misconceptions
4 Other topologies
5 References




[edit] Advantages
See also: Ring Protection

Very orderly network where every device has access to the token and the opportunity to transmit
Performs better than a bus topology under heavy network load
Does not require a central node to manage the connectivity between the computers
Due to the point to point line configuration of devices with a device on either side (each device is connected to its immediate neighbour), it is quite easy to install and reconfigure since adding or removing a device requires moving just two connections.
Point to point line configuration makes it easy to identify and isolate faults.

[edit] Disadvantages

One malfunctioning workstation can create problems for the entire network. This can be solved by using a dual ring or a switch that closes off the break.
Moving, adding and changing the devices can affect the network
Communication delay is directly proportional to number of nodes in the network
Bandwidth is shared on all links between devices
More difficult to configure than a Star: node adjunction  Ring shutdown and reconfiguration

[edit] Misconceptions

"Token Ring is an example of a ring topology." 802.5 (Token Ring) networks do not use a ring topology at layer 1. As explained above, IBM Token Ring (802.5) networks imitate a ring at layer 2 but use a physical star at layer 1.
"Rings prevent collisions." The term "ring" only refers to the layout of the cables. It is true that there are no collisions on an IBM Token Ring, but this is because of the layer 2 Media Access Control method, not the physical topology (which again is a star, not a ring.) Token passing, not rings, prevent collisions.
"Token passing happens on rings." Token passing is a way of managing access to the cable, implemented at the MAC sublayer of layer 2. Ring topology is the cable layout at layer one. It is possible to do token passing on a bus (802.4) a star (802.5) or a ring (FDDI). Token passing is not restricted to rings.

[edit] Other topologies

Star network
Bus network
Mesh network
Tree network
Hypertree network

[edit] References


^ Bradley Mitchell "Network Topologies" [1], About.com Guide, retrieved May 24, 2010


 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 523/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 6335/1500000
Post-expand include size: 5168/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 2285/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/40
Expensive parser function count: 1/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:957001-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20121217063016 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ring_network&oldid=527332142"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Network topologyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2007All articles needing additional references  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 