
Surface tension
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 

 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 


Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player.
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser.


Surface tension and hydrophobicity interact in this attempt to cut a water droplet.


Surface tension is a contractive tendency of the surface of a liquid that allows it to resist an external force. It is revealed, for example, in the floating of some objects on the surface of water, even though they are denser than water, and in the ability of some insects (e.g. water striders) to run on the water surface. This property is caused by cohesion of similar molecules, and is responsible for many of the behaviors of liquids.
Surface tension has the dimension of force per unit length, or of energy per unit area. The two are equivalentbut when referring to energy per unit of area, people use the term surface energywhich is a more general term in the sense that it applies also to solids and not just liquids.
In materials science, surface tension is used for either surface stress or surface free energy.




Contents


1 Causes
2 Effects of surface tension

2.1 Water
2.2 Surfactants


3 Basic physics

3.1 Two definitions
3.2 Surface curvature and pressure
3.3 Liquid surface
3.4 Contact angles

3.4.1 Special contact angles




4 Methods of measurement
5 Effects

5.1 Liquid in a vertical tube
5.2 Puddles on a surface
5.3 The breakup of streams into drops


6 Thermodynamics

6.1 Thermodynamics of soap bubbles

6.1.1 Influence of temperature
6.1.2 Influence of solute concentration
6.1.3 Influence of particle size on vapor pressure




7 Data table
8 See also
9 Gallery of effects
10 Notes
11 References
12 External links




[edit] Causes




Diagram of the forces on molecules of a liquid






Surface tension prevents the paper clip from submerging.


The cohesive forces among liquid molecules are responsible for the phenomenon of surface tension. In the bulk of the liquid, each molecule is pulled equally in every direction by neighboring liquid molecules, resulting in a net force of zero. The molecules at the surface do not have other molecules on all sides of them and therefore are pulled inwards. This creates some internal pressure and forces liquid surfaces to contract to the minimal area.
Surface tension is responsible for the shape of liquid droplets. Although easily deformed, droplets of water tend to be pulled into a spherical shape by the cohesive forces of the surface layer. In the absence of other forces, including gravity, drops of virtually all liquids would be perfectly spherical. The spherical shape minimizes the necessary "wall tension" of the surface layer according to Laplace's law.
Another way to view surface tension is in terms of energy. A molecule in contact with a neighbor is in a lower state of energy than if it were alone (not in contact with a neighbor). The interior molecules have as many neighbors as they can possibly have, but the boundary molecules are missing neighbors (compared to interior molecules) and therefore have a higher energy. For the liquid to minimize its energy state, the number of higher energy boundary molecules must be minimized. The minimized quantity of boundary molecules results in a minimized surface area.[1]
As a result of surface area minimization, a surface will assume the smoothest shape it can (mathematical proof that "smooth" shapes minimize surface area relies on use of the EulerLagrange equation). Since any curvature in the surface shape results in greater area, a higher energy will also result. Consequently the surface will push back against any curvature in much the same way as a ball pushed uphill will push back to minimize its gravitational potential energy.
[edit] Effects of surface tension
[edit] Water
Several effects of surface tension can be seen with ordinary water:
A. Beading of rain water on a waxy surface, such as a leaf. Water adheres weakly to wax and strongly to itself, so water clusters into drops. Surface tension gives them their near-spherical shape, because a sphere has the smallest possible surface area to volume ratio.
B. Formation of drops occurs when a mass of liquid is stretched. The animation shows water adhering to the faucet gaining mass until it is stretched to a point where the surface tension can no longer bind it to the faucet. It then separates and surface tension forms the drop into a sphere. If a stream of water were running from the faucet, the stream would break up into drops during its fall. Gravity stretches the stream, then surface tension pinches it into spheres.[2]
C. Flotation of objects denser than water occurs when the object is nonwettable and its weight is small enough to be borne by the forces arising from surface tension.[1] For example, water striders use surface tension to walk on the surface of a pond. The surface of the water behaves like an elastic film: the insect's feet cause indentations in the water's surface, increasing its surface area.[3]

D. Separation of oil and water (in this case, water and liquid wax) is caused by a tension in the surface between dissimilar liquids. This type of surface tension is called "interface tension", but its physics are the same.
E. Tears of wine is the formation of drops and rivulets on the side of a glass containing an alcoholic beverage. Its cause is a complex interaction between the differing surface tensions of water and ethanol; y ethanol together with ethanol evaporating faster than water.







A. Water beading on a leaf









B. Water dripping from a tap









C. Water striders stay atop the liquid because of surface tensionjnbhbhinhbhbiijbijbjhoojojjnokoj









D. Lava lamp with interaction between dissimilar liquids; water and liquid wax









E. Photo showing the "tears of wine" phenomenon.




[edit] Surfactants
Surface tension is visible in other common phenomena, especially when surfactants are used to decrease it:

Soap bubbles have very large surface areas with very little mass. Bubbles in pure water are unstable. The addition of surfactants, however, can have a stabilizing effect on the bubbles (see Marangoni effect). Notice that surfactants actually reduce the surface tension of water by a factor of three or more.


Emulsions are a type of solution in which surface tension plays a role. Tiny fragments of oil suspended in pure water will spontaneously assemble themselves into much larger masses. But the presence of a surfactant provides a decrease in surface tension, which permits stability of minute droplets of oil in the bulk of water (or vice versa).



[edit] Basic physics
[edit] Two definitions




Diagram shows, in cross-section, a needle floating on the surface of water. Its weight, Fw, depresses the surface, and is balanced by the surface tension forces on either side, Fs, which are each parallel to the water's surface at the points where it contacts the needle. Notice that the horizontal components of the two Fs arrows point in opposite directions, so they cancel each other, but the vertical components point in the same direction and therefore add up[1] to balance Fw.


Surface tension, represented by the symbol  is defined as the force along a line of unit length, where the force is parallel to the surface but perpendicular to the line. One way to picture this is to imagine a flat soap film bounded on one side by a taut thread of length, L. The thread will be pulled toward the interior of the film by a force equal to 2L (the factor of 2 is because the soap film has two sides, hence two surfaces).[4] Surface tension is therefore measured in forces per unit length. Its SI unit is newton per meter but the cgs unit of dyne per cm is also used.[5] One dyn/cm corresponds to 0.001 N/m.
An equivalent definition, one that is useful in thermodynamics, is work done per unit area. As such, in order to increase the surface area of a mass of liquid by an amount, A, a quantity of work, A, is needed.[4] This work is stored as potential energy. Consequently surface tension can be also measured in SI system as joules per square meter and in the cgs system as ergs per cm2. Since mechanical systems try to find a state of minimum potential energy, a free droplet of liquid naturally assumes a spherical shape, which has the minimum surface area for a given volume.
The equivalence of measurement of energy per unit area to force per unit length can be proven by dimensional analysis.[4]

[edit] Surface curvature and pressure




Surface tension forces acting on a tiny (differential) patch of surface. x and y indicate the amount of bend over the dimensions of the patch. Balancing the tension forces with pressure leads to the YoungLaplace equation


If no force acts normal to a tensioned surface, the surface must remain flat. But if the pressure on one side of the surface differs from pressure on the other side, the pressure difference times surface area results in a normal force. In order for the surface tension forces to cancel the force due to pressure, the surface must be curved. The diagram shows how surface curvature of a tiny patch of surface leads to a net component of surface tension forces acting normal to the center of the patch. When all the forces are balanced, the resulting equation is known as the YoungLaplace equation:[6]







where:



p is the pressure difference.
 is surface tension.
Rx and Ry are radii of curvature in each of the axes that are parallel to the surface.



The quantity in parentheses on the right hand side is in fact (twice) the mean curvature of the surface (depending on normalisation).
Solutions to this equation determine the shape of water drops, puddles, menisci, soap bubbles, and all other shapes determined by surface tension (such as the shape of the impressions that a water strider's feet make on the surface of a pond).
The table below shows how the internal pressure of a water droplet increases with decreasing radius. For not very small drops the effect is subtle, but the pressure difference becomes enormous when the drop sizes approach the molecular size. (In the limit of a single molecule the concept becomes meaningless.)


p for water drops of different radii at STP


Droplet radius
1mm
0.1mm
1 m
10 nm


p (atm)
0.0014
0.0144
1.436
143.6



[edit] Liquid surface




Minimal surface


To find the shape of the minimal surface bounded by some arbitrary shaped frame using strictly mathematical means can be a daunting task. Yet by fashioning the frame out of wire and dipping it in soap-solution, a locally minimal surface will appear in the resulting soap-film within seconds.[4][7]
The reason for this is that the pressure difference across a fluid interface is proportional to the mean curvature, as seen in the Young-Laplace equation. For an open soap film, the pressure difference is zero, hence the mean curvature is zero, and minimal surfaces have the property of zero mean curvature.

[edit] Contact angles
Main article: Contact angle
The surface of any liquid is an interface between that liquid and some other medium.[note 1] The top surface of a pond, for example, is an interface between the pond water and the air. Surface tension, then, is not a property of the liquid alone, but a property of the liquid's interface with another medium. If a liquid is in a container, then besides the liquid/air interface at its top surface, there is also an interface between the liquid and the walls of the container. The surface tension between the liquid and air is usually different (greater than) its surface tension with the walls of a container. And where the two surfaces meet, their geometry must be such that all forces balance.[4][6]







Forces at contact point shown for contact angle greater than 90 (left) and less than 90 (right)





Where the two surfaces meet, they form a contact angle, , which is the angle the tangent to the surface makes with the solid surface. The diagram to the right shows two examples. Tension forces are shown for the liquid-air interface, the liquid-solid interface, and the solid-air interface. The example on the left is where the difference between the liquid-solid and solid-air surface tension, , is less than the liquid-air surface tension, , but is nevertheless positive, that is



In the diagram, both the vertical and horizontal forces must cancel exactly at the contact point, known as equilibrium. The horizontal component of  is canceled by the adhesive force, .[4]



The more telling balance of forces, though, is in the vertical direction. The vertical component of  must exactly cancel the force, .[4]





Liquid
Solid
Contact angle


water



soda-lime glass


lead glass


fused quartz



0


ethanol


diethyl ether


carbon tetrachloride


glycerol


acetic acid


water
paraffin wax
107


silver
90


methyl iodide
soda-lime glass
29


lead glass
30


fused quartz
33


mercury
soda-lime glass
140


Some liquid-solid contact angles[4]


Since the forces are in direct proportion to their respective surface tensions, we also have:[6]



where



 is the liquid-solid surface tension,
 is the liquid-air surface tension,
 is the solid-air surface tension,
 is the contact angle, where a concave meniscus has contact angle less than 90 and a convex meniscus has contact angle of greater than 90.[4]



This means that although the difference between the liquid-solid and solid-air surface tension, , is difficult to measure directly, it can be inferred from the liquid-air surface tension, , and the equilibrium contact angle, , which is a function of the easily measurable advancing and receding contact angles (see main article contact angle).
This same relationship exists in the diagram on the right. But in this case we see that because the contact angle is less than 90, the liquid-solid/solid-air surface tension difference must be negative:



[edit] Special contact angles
Observe that in the special case of a water-silver interface where the contact angle is equal to 90, the liquid-solid/solid-air surface tension difference is exactly zero.
Another special case is where the contact angle is exactly 180. Water with specially prepared Teflon approaches this.[6] Contact angle of 180 occurs when the liquid-solid surface tension is exactly equal to the liquid-air surface tension.




[edit] Methods of measurement




Surface tension can be measured using the pendant drop method on a goniometer.


Because surface tension manifests itself in various effects, it offers a number of paths to its measurement. Which method is optimal depends upon the nature of the liquid being measured, the conditions under which its tension is to be measured, and the stability of its surface when it is deformed.

Du Noy Ring method: The traditional method used to measure surface or interfacial tension. Wetting properties of the surface or interface have little influence on this measuring technique. Maximum pull exerted on the ring by the surface is measured.[8]


Du Noy-Padday method: A minimized version of Du Noy method uses a small diameter metal needle instead of a ring, in combination with a high sensitivity microbalance to record maximum pull. The advantage of this method is that very small sample volumes (down to few tens of microliters) can be measured with very high precision, without the need to correct for buoyancy (for a needle or rather, rod, with proper geometry). Further, the measurement can be performed very quickly, minimally in about 20 seconds. First commercial multichannel tensiometers [CMCeeker] were recently built based on this principle.


Wilhelmy plate method: A universal method especially suited to check surface tension over long time intervals. A vertical plate of known perimeter is attached to a balance, and the force due to wetting is measured.[9]


Spinning drop method: This technique is ideal for measuring low interfacial tensions. The diameter of a drop within a heavy phase is measured while both are rotated.


Pendant drop method: Surface and interfacial tension can be measured by this technique, even at elevated temperatures and pressures. Geometry of a drop is analyzed optically. For details, see Drop.[9]


Bubble pressure method (Jaeger's method): A measurement technique for determining surface tension at short surface ages. Maximum pressure of each bubble is measured.


Drop volume method: A method for determining interfacial tension as a function of interface age. Liquid of one density is pumped into a second liquid of a different density and time between drops produced is measured.[10]


Capillary rise method: The end of a capillary is immersed into the solution. The height at which the solution reaches inside the capillary is related to the surface tension by the equation discussed below.[11]


Stalagmometric method: A method of weighting and reading a drop of liquid.


Sessile drop method: A method for determining surface tension and density by placing a drop on a substrate and measuring the contact angle (see Sessile drop technique).[12]


Vibrational frequency of levitated drops: The natural frequency of vibrational oscillations of magnetically levitated drops has been used to measure the surface tension of superfluid 4He. This value is estimated to be 0.375 dyn/cm at T = 0 K.[13]

[edit] Effects
[edit] Liquid in a vertical tube
Main article: Capillary action




Diagram of a mercury barometer


An old style mercury barometer consists of a vertical glass tube about 1cm in diameter partially filled with mercury, and with a vacuum (called Torricelli's vacuum) in the unfilled volume (see diagram to the right). Notice that the mercury level at the center of the tube is higher than at the edges, making the upper surface of the mercury dome-shaped. The center of mass of the entire column of mercury would be slightly lower if the top surface of the mercury were flat over the entire crossection of the tube. But the dome-shaped top gives slightly less surface area to the entire mass of mercury. Again the two effects combine to minimize the total potential energy. Such a surface shape is known as a convex meniscus.
The reason we consider the surface area of the entire mass of mercury, including the part of the surface that is in contact with the glass, is because mercury does not adhere at all to glass. So the surface tension of the mercury acts over its entire surface area, including where it is in contact with the glass. If instead of glass, the tube were made out of copper, the situation would be very different. Mercury aggressively adheres to copper. So in a copper tube, the level of mercury at the center of the tube will be lower than at the edges (that is, it would be a concave meniscus). In a situation where the liquid adheres to the walls of its container, we consider the part of the fluid's surface area that is in contact with the container to have negative surface tension. The fluid then works to maximize the contact surface area. So in this case increasing the area in contact with the container decreases rather than increases the potential energy. That decrease is enough to compensate for the increased potential energy associated with lifting the fluid near the walls of the container.




Illustration of capillary rise and fall. Red=contact angle less than 90; blue=contact angle greater than 90


If a tube is sufficiently narrow and the liquid adhesion to its walls is sufficiently strong, surface tension can draw liquid up the tube in a phenomenon known as capillary action. The height the column is lifted to is given by:[4]







where



 is the height the liquid is lifted,
 is the liquid-air surface tension,
 is the density of the liquid,
 is the radius of the capillary,
 is the acceleration due to gravity,
 is the angle of contact described above. If  is greater than 90, as with mercury in a glass container, the liquid will be depressed rather than lifted.




[edit] Puddles on a surface




Profile curve of the edge of a puddle where the contact angle is 180. The curve is given by the formula:[6]  where 






Small puddles of water on a smooth clean surface have perceptible thickness.


Pouring mercury onto a horizontal flat sheet of glass results in a puddle that has a perceptible thickness. The puddle will spread out only to the point where it is a little under half a centimeter thick, and no thinner. Again this is due to the action of mercury's strong surface tension. The liquid mass flattens out because that brings as much of the mercury to as low a level as possible, but the surface tension, at the same time, is acting to reduce the total surface area. The result is the compromise of a puddle of a nearly fixed thickness.
The same surface tension demonstration can be done with water, lime water or even saline, but only on a surface made of a substance that the water does not adhere to. Wax is such a substance. Water poured onto a smooth, flat, horizontal wax surface, say a waxed sheet of glass, will behave similarly to the mercury poured onto glass.
The thickness of a puddle of liquid on a surface whose contact angle is 180 is given by:[6]







where




 is the depth of the puddle in centimeters or meters.


 is the surface tension of the liquid in dynes per centimeter or newtons per meter.


 is the acceleration due to gravity and is equal to 980cm/s2 or 9.8m/s2


 is the density of the liquid in grams per cubic centimeter or kilograms per cubic meter








Illustration of how lower contact angle leads to reduction of puddle depth


In reality, the thicknesses of the puddles will be slightly less than what is predicted by the above formula because very few surfaces have a contact angle of 180 with any liquid. When the contact angle is less than 180, the thickness is given by:[6]







For mercury on glass, Hg = 487 dyn/cm, Hg = 13.5 g/cm3 and  = 140, which gives hHg = 0.36 cm. For water on paraffin at 25 C,  = 72 dyn/cm,  = 1.0 g/cm3, and  = 107 which gives hH2O = 0.44 cm.
The formula also predicts that when the contact angle is 0, the liquid will spread out into a micro-thin layer over the surface. Such a surface is said to be fully wettable by the liquid.

[edit] The breakup of streams into drops




Intermediate stage of a jet breaking into drops. Radii of curvature in the axial direction are shown. Equation for the radius of the stream is , where  is the radius of the unperturbed stream,  is the amplitude of the perturbation,  is distance along the axis of the stream, and  is the wave number


Main article: PlateauRayleigh instability
In day-to-day life we all observe that a stream of water emerging from a faucet will break up into droplets, no matter how smoothly the stream is emitted from the faucet. This is due to a phenomenon called the PlateauRayleigh instability,[6] which is entirely a consequence of the effects of surface tension.
The explanation of this instability begins with the existence of tiny perturbations in the stream. These are always present, no matter how smooth the stream is. If the perturbations are resolved into sinusoidal components, we find that some components grow with time while others decay with time. Among those that grow with time, some grow at faster rates than others. Whether a component decays or grows, and how fast it grows is entirely a function of its wave number (a measure of how many peaks and troughs per centimeter) and the radii of the original cylindrical stream.
[edit] Thermodynamics
As stated above, the mechanical work needed to increase a surface is . Hence at constant temperature and pressure, surface tension equals Gibbs free energy per surface area:[6]







where  is Gibbs free energy and  is the area.
Thermodynamics requires that all spontaneous changes of state are accompanied by a decrease in Gibbs free energy.
From this it is easy to understand why decreasing the surface area of a mass of liquid is always spontaneous (), provided it is not coupled to any other energy changes. It follows that in order to increase surface area, a certain amount of energy must be added.
Gibbs free energy is defined by the equation,[14] , where  is enthalpy and  is entropy. Based upon this and the fact that surface tension is Gibbs free energy per unit area, it is possible to obtain the following expression for entropy per unit area:







Kelvin's Equation for surfaces arises by rearranging the previous equations. It states that surface enthalpy or surface energy (different from surface free energy) depends both on surface tension and its derivative with temperature at constant pressure by the relationship.[15]







[edit] Thermodynamics of soap bubbles
The pressure inside an ideal (one surface) soap bubble can be derived from thermodynamic free energy considerations. At constant temperature and particle number, , the differential Helmholtz energy is given by







where  is the difference in pressure inside and outside of the bubble, and  is the surface tension. In equilibrium, , and so,



.



For a spherical bubble, the volume and surface area are given simply by



 ,



and



 .



Substituting these relations into the previous expression, we find



 ,



which is equivalent to the YoungLaplace equation when Rx = Ry. For real soap bubbles, the pressure is doubled due to the presence of two interfaces, one inside and one outside.
[edit] Influence of temperature




Temperature dependence of the surface tension of pure water






Temperature dependency of the surface tension of benzene


Surface tension is dependent on temperature. For that reason, when a value is given for the surface tension of an interface, temperature must be explicitly stated. The general trend is that surface tension decreases with the increase of temperature, reaching a value of 0 at the critical temperature. For further details see Etvs rule. There are only empirical equations to relate surface tension and temperature:

Etvs:[8][15][16]








Here V is the molar volume of a substance, TC is the critical temperature and k is a constant valid for almost all substances.[8] A typical value is k = 2.1 x 107 [J K1 mol2/3].[8][16] For water one can further use V = 18ml/mol and TC = 374C.
A variant on Etvs is described by Ramay and Shields:[14]







where the temperature offset of 6 kelvins provides the formula with a better fit to reality at lower temperatures.

Guggenheim-Katayama:[15]








 is a constant for each liquid and n is an empirical factor, whose value is 11/9 for organic liquids. This equation was also proposed by van der Waals, who further proposed that  could be given by the expression, , where  is a universal constant for all liquids, and  is the critical pressure of the liquid (although later experiments found  to vary to some degree from one liquid to another).[15]
Both Guggenheim-Katayama and Etvs take into account the fact that surface tension reaches 0 at the critical temperature, whereas Ramay and Shields fails to match reality at this endpoint.
[edit] Influence of solute concentration
Solutes can have different effects on surface tension depending on their structure:

Little or no effect, for example sugar
Increase surface tension, inorganic salts
Decrease surface tension progressively, alcohols
Decrease surface tension and, once a minimum is reached, no more effect: surfactants

What complicates the effect is that a solute can exist in a different concentration at the surface of a solvent than in its bulk. This difference varies from one solute/solvent combination to another.
Gibbs isotherm states that:[14] 

 is known as surface concentration, it represents excess of solute per unit area of the surface over what would be present if the bulk concentration prevailed all the way to the surface. It has units of mol/m2


 is the concentration of the substance in the bulk solution.


 is the gas constant and  the temperature

Certain assumptions are taken in its deduction, therefore Gibbs isotherm can only be applied to ideal (very dilute) solutions with two components.
[edit] Influence of particle size on vapor pressure
See also: GibbsThomson effect
The ClausiusClapeyron relation leads to another equation also attributed to Kelvin, as the Kelvin equation. It explains why, because of surface tension, the vapor pressure for small droplets of liquid in suspension is greater than standard vapor pressure of that same liquid when the interface is flat. That is to say that when a liquid is forming small droplets, the equilibrium concentration of its vapor in its surroundings is greater. This arises because the pressure inside the droplet is greater than outside.[14]











Molecules on the surface of a tiny droplet (left) have, on average, fewer neighbors than those on a flat surface (right). Hence they are bound more weakly to the droplet than are flat-surface molecules.





 is the standard vapor pressure for that liquid at that temperature and pressure.
 is the molar volume.
 is the gas constant



 is the Kelvin radius, the radius of the droplets.
The effect explains supersaturation of vapors. In the absence of nucleation sites, tiny droplets must form before they can evolve into larger droplets. This requires a vapor pressure many times the vapor pressure at the phase transition point.[14]
This equation is also used in catalyst chemistry to assess mesoporosity for solids.[17]
The effect can be viewed in terms of the average number of molecular neighbors of surface molecules (see diagram).
The table shows some calculated values of this effect for water at different drop sizes:


P/P0 for water drops of different radii at STP[15]


Droplet radius (nm)
1000
100
10
1


P/P0
1.001
1.011
1.114
2.95


The effect becomes clear for very small drop sizes, as a drop of 1nm radius has about 100 molecules inside, which is a quantity small enough to require a quantum mechanics analysis.
[edit] Data table

Surface tension of various liquids in dyn/cm against air[18]
Mixture compositions denoted "%" are by mass
dyn/cm is equivalent to the SI units of mN/m (millinewton per meter)

Liquid
Temperature C
Surface tension, 


Acetic acid
20
27.6


Acetic acid (40.1%) + Water
30
40.68


Acetic acid (10.0%) + Water
30
54.56


Acetone
20
23.7


Diethyl ether
20
17.0


Ethanol
20
22.27


Ethanol (40%) + Water
25
29.63


Ethanol (11.1%) + Water
25
46.03


Glycerol
20
63


n-Hexane
20
18.4


Hydrochloric acid 17.7M aqueous solution
20
65.95


Isopropanol
20
21.7


Liquid helium II
-273
0.37 [1]


Liquid nitrogen
-196
8.85


Mercury
15
487


Methanol
20
22.6


n-Octane
20
21.8


Sodium chloride 6.0M aqueous solution
20
82.55


Sucrose (55%) + water
20
76.45


Water
0
75.64


Water
25
71.97


Water
50
67.91


Water
100
58.85


Toluene
25
27.73


[edit] See also




Underwater diving  portal





Anti-fog
Capillary wave  short waves on a water surface, governed by surface tension and inertia
Cheerio effect  the tendency for small wettable floating objects to attract one another.
Cohesion
Dimensionless numbers

Bond number or Etvs number
Capillary number
Marangoni number
Weber number


Dortmund Data Bank  contains experimental temperature-dependent surface tensions.
Electrodipping force
Electrowetting
Electrocapillarity
Etvs rule  a rule for predicting surface tension dependent on temperature.
Fluid pipe
Hydrostatic equilibriumthe effect of gravity pulling matter into a round shape.
Meniscus  surface curvature formed by a liquid in a container.
Mercury beating heart  a consequence of inhomogeneous surface tension.
Microfluidics
Sessile drop technique
Sow-Hsin Chen
Specific surface energy  same as surface tension in isotropic materials.
Spinning drop method
Stalagmometric method
Surface pressure
Surface tension values
Surfactants  substances which reduce surface tension.
Szyszkowski equation  Calculating surface tension of aqueous solutions
Tears of wine  the surface tension induced phenomenon seen on the sides of glasses containing alcoholic beverages.
Tolman length  leading term in correcting the surface tension for curved surfaces.
Wetting and dewetting


[edit] Gallery of effects







Breakup of a moving sheet of water bouncing off of a spoon.









Photo of flowing water adhering to a hand. Surface tension creates the sheet of water between the flow and the hand.









A soap bubble balances surface tension forces against internal pneumatic pressure.









Surface tension prevents a coin from sinking: the coin is indisputably denser than water, so it must be displacing a volume greater than its own for buoyancy to balance mass.









A daisy. The entirety of the flower lies below the level of the (undisturbed) free surface. The water rises smoothly around its edge. Surface tension prevents water filling the air between the petals and possibly submerging the flower.









A metal paper clip floats on water. Several can usually be carefully added without overflow of water.









An aluminium coin floats on the surface of the water at 10 C. Any extra weight would drop the coin to the bottom.




[edit] Notes

^ In a mercury barometer, the upper liquid surface is an interface between the liquid and a vacuum containing some molecules of evaporated liquid.

[edit] References


^ a b c White, Harvey E. (1948). Modern College Physics. van Nostrand. ISBN0-442-29401-8.
^ John W. M. Bush (May 2004). "MIT Lecture Notes on Surface Tension, lecture 5" (PDF). Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://web.mit.edu/1.63/www/Lec-notes/Surfacetension/Lecture5.pdf. Retrieved April 1, 2007.
^ John W. M. Bush (May 2004). "MIT Lecture Notes on Surface Tension, lecture 3" (PDF). Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://web.mit.edu/1.63/www/Lec-notes/Surfacetension/Lecture3.pdf. Retrieved April 1, 2007.
^ a b c d e f g h i j Sears, Francis Weston; Zemanski, Mark W. University Physics 2nd ed. Addison Wesley 1955
^ John W. M. Bush (April 2004). "MIT Lecture Notes on Surface Tension, lecture 1" (PDF). Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://web.mit.edu/1.63/www/Lec-notes/Surfacetension/Lecture1.pdf. Retrieved April 1, 2007.
^ a b c d e f g h i Pierre-Gilles de Gennes; Franoise Brochard-Wyart; David Qur (2002). Capillary and Wetting PhenomenaDrops, Bubbles, Pearls, Waves. Alex Reisinger. Springer. ISBN0-387-00592-7.
^ Aaronson, Scott. "NP-Complete Problems and physical reality.". SIGACT News. http://www.scottaaronson.com/papers/npcomplete.pdf.
^ a b c d "Surface Tension by the Ring Method (Du Nouy Method)" (PDF). PHYWE. http://www.nikhef.nl/~h73/kn1c/praktikum/phywe/LEP/Experim/1_4_05.pdf. Retrieved 2007-09-08.
^ a b "Surface and Interfacial Tension". Langmuir-Blodgett Instruments. http://www.ksvinc.com/surface_tension1.htm. Retrieved 2007-09-08.
^ "Surfacants at interfaces" (PDF). lauda.de. http://lauda.de/hosting/lauda/webres.nsf/urlnames/graphics_tvt2/$file/Tensio-dyn-meth-e.pdf. Retrieved 2007-09-08.
^ Calvert, James B. "Surface Tension (physics lecture notes)". University of Denver. http://mysite.du.edu/~jcalvert/phys/surftens.htm. Retrieved 2007-09-08.
^ "Sessile Drop Method". Dataphysics. Archived from the original on August 8, 2007. http://web.archive.org/web/20070808082309/http://www.dataphysics.de/english/messmeth_sessil.htm. Retrieved 2007-09-08.
^ Vicente, C.; Yao, W.; Maris, H.; Seidel, G. (2002). "Surface tension of liquid 4He as measured using the vibration modes of a levitated drop". Physical Review B 66 (21). Bibcode 2002PhRvB..66u4504V. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.66.214504.
^ a b c d e Moore, Walter J. (1962). Physical Chemistry, 3rd ed. Prentice Hall.
^ a b c d e Adam, Neil Kensington (1941). The Physics and Chemistry of Surfaces, 3rd ed. Oxford University Press.
^ a b "Physical Properties Sources Index: Etvs Constant". http://www.ppsi.ethz.ch/fmi/xsl/eqi/eqi_property_details_en.xsl?node_id=1113. Retrieved 2008-11-16.
^ G. Ertl, H. Knzinger and J. Weitkamp; Handbook of heterogeneous catalysis, Vol. 2, page 430; Wiley-VCH; Weinheim; 1997 ISBN 3-527-31241-2
^ Lange's Handbook of Chemistry (1967) 10th ed. pp 16611665 ISBN 0-07-016190-9 (11th ed.)


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Surface tension



On surface tension and interesting real-world cases
MIT Lecture Notes on Surface Tension
Surface Tensions of Various Liquids
Calculation of temperature-dependent surface tensions for some common components
Surface Tension Calculator For Aqueous Solutions Containing the Ions H+, NH4+, Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, SO42, NO3, Cl, CO32, Br and OH.
The Bubble Wall (Audio slideshow from the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory explaining cohesion, surface tension and hydrogen bonds)
C. Pfister: Interface Free Energy. Scholarpedia 2010 (from first principles of statistical mechanics)









v
t
e


Branches of physics






Divisions



Applied physics
Experimental physics
Theoretical physics








Energy and motion



Classical mechanics

Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics


Continuum mechanics
Celestial mechanics
Statistical mechanics
Thermodynamics
Fluid mechanics
Quantum mechanics








Waves and fields



Gravitation
Electromagnetism
Quantum field theory
Relativity

Special relativity
General relativity











Physical sciences
and mathematics




Accelerator physics
Acoustics
Astrophysics

Heliophysics
Nuclear astrophysics
Solar physics
Space physics
Stellar physics


Atomic, molecular, and optical physics
Chemical physics
Computational physics
Condensed matter physics

Solid-state physics


Digital physics
Material physics
Mathematical physics
Nuclear physics
Optics

Nonlinear optics
Quantum optics


Particle physics

Astroparticle physics
Phenomenology


Plasma
Polymer physics
Statistical physics









Physics and biology/
geology/ economics




Biophysics

Biomechanics
Medical physics
Neurophysics


Agrophysics

Soil physics


Atmospheric physics
Econophysics
Geophysics
Psychophysics
















v
t
e


Diving medicine, physiology, physics and environment






Diving medicine:





Injuries
and
Disorders






Pressure









Oxygen




Deep water blackout
Hyperoxia
Oxygen toxicity
Shallow water blackout









Inert gases




Atrial septal defect
Avascular necrosis
Decompression sickness
Dysbaric osteonecrosis
High-pressure nervous syndrome
Hydrogen narcosis
Isobaric counterdiffusion
Nitrogen narcosis
Taravana
Uncontrolled decompression









Carbon dioxide




Hypercapnia







Aerosinusitis
Air embolism
Alternobaric vertigo
Barodontalgia
Barostriction
Barotrauma
Decompression illness
Dental barotrauma
Dysbarism
Ear clearing
Frenzel maneuver
Valsalva maneuver









Immersion




Asphyxia
Drowning
Hypothermia
Hypoxia (medical)
Immersion diuresis
Instinctive drowning response
Salt water aspiration syndrome
Swimming-induced pulmonary edema







List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders
Seasickness
Cramps









Treatments




Diving medicine
Hyperbaric medicine
In-water recompression
Oxygen therapy
Diving chamber














Diving physiology



Bloodair barrier
CO retention
Cold shock response
Blood shift
Decompression (diving)
Gas exchange
Lipid
Mammalian diving reflex
Metabolism
Normocapnia
Oxygen window in technical diving
Perfusion
Pulmonary circulation
Respiratory exchange ratio
Respiratory quotient
Systemic circulation
Tissue (biology)








Diving physics



Ambient pressure
Anti fog
Amontons' law
Archimedes' principle
Atmospheric pressure
Boyle's law
Breathing performance of regulators
Buoyancy
Charles' law
Combined gas law
Dalton's law
Diffusion
Diving physics
Force
Gay-Lussac's law
Henry's law
Hydrophobe
Hydrostatic pressure
Ideal gas law
Molecular diffusion
Neutral buoyancy
Partial pressure
Permeation
Pressure
Psychrometric constant
Solution
Solubility
Supersaturation
Surfactant
Surface tension
Torricellian chamber
Underwater vision
Weight








Diving environment



Algal bloom
Breaking wave
Current (ocean)
Current (stream)
Ekman transport
Halocline
Longshore current
Rip current
Stratification
Surf
Surge (wave action)
Thermocline
Tides
Turbidity
Undertow (wave action)
Upwelling








Researchers in
diving medicine,
physiology and physics



Arthur J. Bachrach
Albert R. Behnke
Paul Bert
George F. Bond
Sir Robert Boyle
Albert A. Bhlmann
William Paul Fife
John Scott Haldane
Leonard Erskine Hill
Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Christian J. Lambertsen
Simon Mitchell
Charles Momsen
John Rawlins (Royal Navy officer)
Charles Wesley Shilling
Jules Triger
Edward D. Thalmann








Related



Portal:Underwater diving
Artificial gills (human)
Aerospace Medical Association
Divers Alert Network
Diving Diseases Research Centre
List of diving hazards and precautions
National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology
Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine
Rubicon Foundation
South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society
United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit
Glossary of underwater diving terminology









 
 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 11894/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 39725/1500000
Post-expand include size: 109713/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 53793/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/40
Expensive parser function count: 1/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:113302-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130126151859 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Surface_tension&oldid=534993192"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Concepts in physicsFluid mechanicsSurface chemistryHidden categories: Good articles  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 