
Telephone line
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 
(Redirected from Telephone lines)
 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
For the Electric Light Orchestra song, see Telephone Line (Electric Light Orchestra song).





The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article and discuss the issue on the talk page. (December 2010) 







This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008) 






Phone pole with phone and mainly electric lines






Fixed telephone lines per 100 inhabitants 19972007


A telephone line or telephone circuit (or just line or circuit within the industry) is a single-user circuit on a telephone communication system. Typically this refers to the physical wire or other signaling medium connecting the user's telephone apparatus to the telecommunications network, and usually also implies a single telephone number for billing purposes reserved for that user.
In 1878, the Bell Telephone Company began to use two-wire circuits (called the local loop) from each user's telephone to end offices which performed any necessary electrical switching to allow voice signals to be transmitted to more distant telephones.
These wires were typically copper, although aluminium has also been used, and were carried in balanced pairs separated by about 25cm (10") on poles above the ground, and later as twisted pair cables. Modern lines may run underground, and may carry analog or digital signals to the exchange, or may have a device that converts the analog signal to digital for transmission on a carrier system.
In most cases, two copper wires (tip and ring) for each telephone line run from a home or other small building to a local telephone exchange. There is a central junction box for the building where the wires that go to telephone jacks throughout the building and wires that go to the exchange meet and can be connected in different configurations depending upon the subscribed telephone service. The wires between the junction box and the exchange are known as the local loop, and the network of wires going to an exchange, the access network.
The vast majority of houses in the U.S. are wired with 6-position modular jacks with four conductors wired to the house's junction box with copper wires. Those wires may be connected back to two telephone lines at the local telephone exchange, thus making those jacks RJ14 jacks. More often, only two of the wires are connected to the exchange as one telephone line, and the others are unconnected. In that case, the jacks in the house are RJ11.
[edit] See also

Landline
Party line
Local loop
Wire

 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 802/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 5275/1500000
Post-expand include size: 12989/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 5615/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/40
Expensive parser function count: 3/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:946963-0!*!0!*!*!4!* and timestamp 20121217210926 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telephone_line&oldid=527436875"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Local loopHidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2010USA-centricPages in non-existent country centric categoriesArticles lacking sources from January 2008All articles lacking sources  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 