
Torque
 /firstHeading 
 bodyContent 

 tagline 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 /tagline 
 subtitle 
(Redirected from Torques)
 /subtitle 
 jumpto 

					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

 /jumpto 
 bodycontent 
For other uses, see Torque (disambiguation).


Classical mechanics


History of classical mechanics
Timeline of classical mechanics




Branches



Statics
Dynamics / Kinetics
Kinematics
Applied mechanics
Celestial mechanics
Continuum mechanics
Statistical mechanics









Formulations


Newtonian mechanics (Vectorial mechanics)
Analytical mechanics:

Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics










Fundamental concepts



Space
Time
Mass
Inertia
Velocity
Speed
Acceleration
Force
Momentum
Impulse
Torque / Moment / Couple
Angular momentum
Moment of inertia
Reference frame
Energy
Kinetic energy
Potential energy
Mechanical work
Mechanical power
Virtual work
D'Alembert's principle









Core topics



Rigid body
Rigid body dynamics
Euler's equations (rigid body dynamics)
Motion
Linear motion
Newton's laws of motion
Newton's law of universal gravitation
Euler's laws of motion
Equations of motion
Inertial frame of reference
Non-inertial reference frame
Fictitious force
Mechanics of planar particle motion
Displacement (vector)
Relative velocity
Friction
Simple harmonic motion
Harmonic oscillator
Vibration
Damping
Damping ratio



Rotational motion


Circular motion
Uniform circular motion
Non-uniform circular motion
Rotating reference frame
Centripetal force
Centrifugal force
Centrifugal force (rotating reference frame)
Reactive centrifugal force
Coriolis force
Pendulum
Tangential speed
Rotational speed
Angular acceleration
Angular velocity
Angular frequency
Angular displacement









Scientists



Galileo
Newton
Kepler
Horrocks
Halley
Euler
d'Alembert
Clairaut
Lagrange
Laplace
Hamilton
Poisson
Daniel Bernoulli
Johann Bernoulli
Cauchy










v
t
e







Relationship between force F, torque , linear momentum p, and angular momentum L in a system which has rotation constrained in one plane only (forces and moments due to gravity and friction not considered).


Torque, moment or moment of force (see the terminology below), is the tendency of a force to rotate an object about an axis,[1] fulcrum, or pivot. Just as a force is a push or a pull, a torque can be thought of as a twist to an object. Mathematically, torque is defined as the cross product of the lever-arm distance and force, which tends to produce rotation.
Loosely speaking, torque is a measure of the turning force on an object such as a bolt or a flywheel. For example, pushing or pulling the handle of a wrench connected to a nut or bolt produces a torque (turning force) that loosens or tightens the nut or bolt.
The symbol for torque is typically , the Greek letter tau. When it is called moment, it is commonly denoted M.
The magnitude of torque depends on three quantities: the force applied, the length of the lever arm[2] connecting the axis to the point of force application, and the angle between the force vector and the lever arm. In symbols:






where

 is the torque vector and  is the magnitude of the torque,
r is the displacement vector (a vector from the point from which torque is measured to the point where force is applied), and r is the length (or magnitude) of the lever arm vector,
F is the force vector, and F is the magnitude of the force,
 denotes the cross product,
 is the angle between the force vector and the lever arm vector.

The length of the lever arm is particularly important; choosing this length appropriately lies behind the operation of levers, pulleys, gears, and most other simple machines involving a mechanical advantage.
The SI unit for torque is the newton metre (Nm). For more on the units of torque, see below.




Contents


1 Terminology
2 History
3 Definition and relation to angular momentum

3.1 Proof of the equivalence of definitions


4 Units
5 Special cases and other facts

5.1 Moment arm formula
5.2 Static equilibrium
5.3 Net force versus torque


6 Machine torque
7 Relationship between torque, power, and energy

7.1 Conversion to other units
7.2 Derivation


8 Principle of moments
9 Torque multiplier
10 See also
11 References
12 External links




[edit] Terminology
See also: Couple (mechanics)
This article follows US physics terminology by using the word torque. In the UK and in US mechanical engineering,[3] this is called moment of force[4] shortened usually to moment.
In US mechanical engineering, the term torque means 'the resultant moment of a Couple',[5] and (unlike in US physics), the terms torque and moment are not interchangeable. Torque is defined mathematically as the rate of change of angular momentum of an object. The definition of torque states that one or both of the angular velocity or the moment of inertia of an object are changing. And moment is the general term used for the tendency of one or more applied forces to rotate an object about an axis, but not necessarily to change the angular momentum of the object (the concept which in physics is called torque).[5]
For example, a rotational force applied to a shaft causing acceleration, such as a drill bit accelerating from rest, the resulting moment is called a torque. By contrast, a lateral force on a beam produces a moment (called a bending moment), but since the angular momentum of the beam is not changing, this bending moment is not called a torque. Similarly with any force couple on an object that has no change to its angular momentum, such moment is also not called a torque.
This article follows the US physics terminology by calling all moments by the term torque, whether or not they cause the angular momentum of an object to change.
[edit] History
The concept of torque, also called moment or couple, originated with the studies of Archimedes on levers. The rotational analogues of force, mass, and acceleration are torque, moment of inertia and angular acceleration, respectively.
[edit] Definition and relation to angular momentum




A particle is located at position r relative to its axis of rotation. When a force F is applied to the particle, only the perpendicular component F produces a torque. This torque =rF has magnitude =|r||F|=|r||F|sin and is directed outward from the page.


A force applied at a right angle to a lever multiplied by its distance from the lever's fulcrum (the length of the lever arm) is its torque. A force of three newtons applied two metres from the fulcrum, for example, exerts the same torque as a force of one newton applied six metres from the fulcrum. The direction of the torque can be determined by using the right hand grip rule: if the fingers of the right hand are curled from the direction of the lever arm to the direction of the force, then the thumb points in the direction of the torque.[6]
More generally, the torque on a particle (which has the position r in some reference frame) can be defined as the cross product:



where r is the particle's position vector relative to the fulcrum, and F is the force acting on the particle. The magnitude  of the torque is given by



where r is the distance from the axis of rotation to the particle, F is the magnitude of the force applied, and  is the angle between the position and force vectors. Alternatively,



where F is the amount of force directed perpendicularly to the position of the particle. Any force directed parallel to the particle's position vector does not produce a torque.[7]
It follows from the properties of the cross product that the torque vector is perpendicular to both the position and force vectors. It points along the axis of the rotation that this torque would initiate, starting from rest, and its direction is determined by the right-hand rule.[7]
The unbalanced torque on a body along axis of rotation determines the rate of change of the body's angular momentum,



where L is the angular momentum vector and t is time. If multiple torques are acting on the body, it is instead the net torque which determines the rate of change of the angular momentum:



For rotation about a fixed axis,



where I is the moment of inertia and  is the angular velocity. It follows that



where  is the angular acceleration of the body, measured in rad/s2. This equation has the limitation that the torque equation is to be only written about instantaneous axis of rotation or center of mass for any type of motion - either motion is pure translation, pure rotation or mixed motion. I = Moment of inertia about point about which torque is written (either about instantaneous axis of rotation or center of mass only). If body is in translatory equilibrium then the torque equation is same about all points in the plane of motion.
[edit] Proof of the equivalence of definitions
The definition of angular momentum for a single particle is:



where "" indicates the vector cross product, p is the particle's linear momentum, and r is the displacement vector from the origin (the origin is assumed to be a fixed location anywhere in space). The time-derivative of this is:



This result can easily be proven by splitting the vectors into components and applying the product rule. Now using the definition of linear momentum p = mv (if mass is constant) and the definition of velocity 



The cross product of any vector with itself is zero, so the second term vanishes. Hence with the definition of force F = ma (Newton's 2nd law),



Then by definition, torque  = r  F.
If multiple forces are applied, Newton's second law instead reads Fnet = ma, and it follows that



The proof relies on the assumption that mass is constant; this is valid only in non-relativistic systems in which no mass is being ejected.
[edit] Units
Torque has dimensions of force times distance. Official SI literature suggests using the unit newton metre (Nm) or the unit joule per radian.[8] The unit newton metre is properly denoted Nm or Nm.[9] This avoids ambiguity with mN, millinewtons.
The SI unit for energy or work is the joule. It is dimensionally equivalent to a force of one newton acting over a distance of one metre, but it is not used for torque. Energy and torque are entirely different concepts, so the practice of using different unit names (i.e., reserving newton metres for torque and using only joules for energy) helps avoid mistakes and misunderstandings.[8] The dimensional equivalence of these units, of course, is not simply a coincidence: A torque of 1Nm applied through a full revolution will require an energy of exactly 2 joules. Mathematically,



where E is the energy,  is magnitude of the torque, and  is the angle moved (in radians). This equation motivates the alternate unit name joules per radian.[8]
In Imperial units, "pound-force-feet" (lbfft), "foot-pounds-force", "inch-pounds-force", "ounce-force-inches" (ozin) are used, and other non-SI units of torque includes "metre-kilograms-force". For all these units, the word "force" is often left out,[10] for example abbreviating "pound-force-foot" to simply "pound-foot" (in this case, it would be implicit that the "pound" is pound-force and not pound-mass). This is an example of the confusion caused by the use of traditional units that may be avoided with SI units because of the careful distinction in SI between force (in newtons) and mass (in kilograms).
Sometimes one may see torque given units that do not dimensionally make sense. For example: gram centimetre. In these units, "gram" should be understood as the force given by the weight of 1gram at the surface of the earth, i.e., 0.00980665N. The surface of the earth is understood to have a standard acceleration of gravity (9.80665m/s2).
[edit] Special cases and other facts
[edit] Moment arm formula




Moment arm diagram


A very useful special case, often given as the definition of torque in fields other than physics, is as follows:



The construction of the "moment arm" is shown in the figure to the right, along with the vectors r and F mentioned above. The problem with this definition is that it does not give the direction of the torque but only the magnitude, and hence it is difficult to use in three-dimensional cases. If the force is perpendicular to the displacement vector r, the moment arm will be equal to the distance to the centre, and torque will be a maximum for the given force. The equation for the magnitude of a torque, arising from a perpendicular force:



For example, if a person places a force of 10 N on a spanner (wrench) which is 0.5 m long, the torque will be 5 Nm, assuming that the person pulls the spanner by applying force perpendicular to the spanner.




The torque caused by the two opposing forces Fg and Fg causes a change in the angular momentum L in the direction of that torque. This causes the top to precess.


[edit] Static equilibrium
For an object to be in static equilibrium, not only must the sum of the forces be zero, but also the sum of the torques (moments) about any point. For a two-dimensional situation with horizontal and vertical forces, the sum of the forces requirement is two equations: H = 0 and V = 0, and the torque a third equation:  = 0. That is, to solve statically determinate equilibrium problems in two-dimensions, we use three equations.
[edit] Net force versus torque
When the net force on the system is zero, the torque measured from any point in space is the same. For example, the torque on a current-carrying loop in a uniform magnetic field is the same regardless of your point of reference. If the net force  is not zero, and  is the torque measured from , then the torque measured from  is ... 
[edit] Machine torque




Torque curve of a motorcycle ("BMW K 1200 R 2005"). The horizontal axis is the speed (in rpm) that the crankshaft is turning, and the vertical axis is the torque (in Newton metres) that the engine is capable of providing at that speed.


Torque is part of the basic specification of an engine: the power output of an engine is expressed as its torque multiplied by its rotational speed of the axis. Internal-combustion engines produce useful torque only over a limited range of rotational speeds (typically from around 1,0006,000 rpm for a small car). The varying torque output over that range can be measured with a dynamometer, and shown as a torque curve.
Steam engines and electric motors tend to produce maximum torque close to zero rpm, with the torque diminishing as rotational speed rises (due to increasing friction and other constraints). Reciprocating steam engines can start heavy loads from zero RPM without a clutch.
[edit] Relationship between torque, power, and energy
If a force is allowed to act through a distance, it is doing mechanical work. Similarly, if torque is allowed to act through a rotational distance, it is doing work. Mathematically, for rotation about a fixed axis through the center of mass,



where W is work,  is torque, and 1 and 2 represent (respectively) the initial and final angular positions of the body.[11] It follows from the work-energy theorem that W also represents the change in the rotational kinetic energy Er of the body, given by



where I is the moment of inertia of the body and  is its angular speed.[11]
Power is the work per unit time, given by



where P is power,  is torque,  is the angular velocity, and  represents the scalar product.
Mathematically, the equation may be rearranged to compute torque for a given power output. Note that the power injected by the torque depends only on the instantaneous angular speed  not on whether the angular speed increases, decreases, or remains constant while the torque is being applied (this is equivalent to the linear case where the power injected by a force depends only on the instantaneous speed  not on the resulting acceleration, if any).
In practice, this relationship can be observed in power stations which are connected to a large electrical power grid. In such an arrangement, the generator's angular speed is fixed by the grid's frequency, and the power output of the plant is determined by the torque applied to the generator's axis of rotation.
Consistent units must be used. For metric SI units power is watts, torque is newton metres and angular speed is radians per second (not rpm and not revolutions per second).
Also, the unit newton metre is dimensionally equivalent to the joule, which is the unit of energy. However, in the case of torque, the unit is assigned to a vector, whereas for energy, it is assigned to a scalar.
[edit] Conversion to other units
A conversion factor may be necessary when using different units of power, torque, or angular speed. For example, if rotational speed (revolutions per time) is used in place of angular speed (radians per time), we multiply by a factor of 2 radians per revolution. In the following formulas, P is power,  is torque and  is rotational speed.



Adding units:



Dividing on the left by 60 seconds per minute gives us the following.



where rotational speed is in revolutions per minute (rpm).
Some people (e.g. American automotive engineers) use horsepower (imperial mechanical) for power, foot-pounds (lbfft) for torque and rpm for rotational speed. This results in the formula changing to:



The constant below (in foot pounds per minute) changes with the definition of the horsepower; for example, using metric horsepower, it becomes approximately 32,550.
Use of other units (e.g. BTU per hour for power) would require a different custom conversion factor.
[edit] Derivation
For a rotating object, the linear distance covered at the circumference in a radian of rotation is the product of the radius with the angular speed. That is: linear speed = radius  angular speed. By definition, linear distance = linear speed  time=radius  angular speed  time.
By the definition of torque: torque = force  radius. We can rearrange this to determine force = torque  radius. These two values can be substituted into the definition of power:



The radius r and time t have dropped out of the equation. However, angular speed must be in radians, by the assumed direct relationship between linear speed and angular speed at the beginning of the derivation. If the rotational speed is measured in revolutions per unit of time, the linear speed and distance are increased proportionately by 2 in the above derivation to give:



If torque is in Newton-metres and rotational speed in revolutions per second, the above equation gives power in Newton-metres per second, or Watts. If Imperial units are used, and if torque is in pounds-force feet and rotational speed in revolutions per minute, the above equation gives power in foot pounds-force per minute. The horsepower form of the equation is then derived by applying the conversion factor 33,000ftlbf/min per horsepower:



because 
[edit] Principle of moments
The Principle of Moments, also known as Varignon's theorem (not to be confused with the geometrical theorem of the same name) states that the sum of torques due to several forces applied to a single point is equal to the torque due to the sum (resultant) of the forces. Mathematically, this follows from:



[edit] Torque multiplier
A torque multiplier is a gear box with reduction ratios greater than 1. The given torque at the input gets multiplied as per the reduction ratio and transmitted to the output, thereby achieving greater torque, but with reduced rotational speed.
[edit] See also


Conversion of units
Angular momentum
Mechanical equilibrium
Moment (physics)
Rigid body dynamics
Statics
Torque converter
Torque screwdriver
Torque limiter
Torque wrench
Torque tester
Torsion (mechanics)
Couple (mechanics)


[edit] References


^ Serway, R. A. and Jewett, Jr. J. W. (2003). Physics for Scientists and Engineers. 6th Ed. Brooks Cole. ISBN 0-534-40842-7.
^ Tipler, Paul (2004). Physics for Scientists and Engineers: Mechanics, Oscillations and Waves, Thermodynamics (5th ed.). W. H. Freeman. ISBN0-7167-0809-4.
^ Physics for Engineering by Hendricks, Subramony, and Van Blerk, Chinappi page 148, Web link
^ SI brochure
^ a b Dynamics, Theory and Applications by T.R. Kane and D.A. Levinson, 1985, pp. 9099: Free download
^ "Right Hand Rule for Torque". http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/tord.html. Retrieved 2007-09-08.
^ a b Halliday, David; Resnick, Robert (1970). Fundamentals of Physics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.. pp.18485.
^ a b c From the official SI website: "...For example, the quantity torque may be thought of as the cross product of force and distance, suggesting the unit newton metre, or it may be thought of as energy per angle, suggesting the unit joule per radian."
^ "SI brochure Ed. 8, Section 5.1". Bureau International des Poids et Mesures. 2006. http://www1.bipm.org/en/si/si_brochure/chapter5/5-1.html. Retrieved 2007-04-01.
^ See, for example: "CNC Cookbook: Dictionary: N-Code to PWM". http://www.cnccookbook.com/MTCNCDictNtoPWM.htm. Retrieved 2008-12-17.
^ a b Kleppner, Daniel; Kolenkow, Robert (1973). An Introduction to Mechanics. McGraw-Hill. pp.26768.


[edit] External links

Power and Torque Explained A clear explanation of the relationship between Power and Torque, and how they relate to engine performance.
"Horsepower and Torque" An article showing how power, torque, and gearing affect a vehicle's performance.
"Torque vs. Horsepower: Yet Another Argument" An automotive perspective
a discussion of torque and angular momentum in an online textbook
Torque and Angular Momentum in Circular Motion on Project PHYSNET.
An interactive simulation of torque
Torque Unit Converter
Torque Measurement Primer
Animation of how a bucking machine works

 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor visited node count: 5726/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 41426/1500000
Post-expand include size: 53606/2048000 bytes
Template argument size: 29931/2048000 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 25/40
Expensive parser function count: 1/500

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:30400-0!0!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20130124183027 
  /bodycontent 
 printfooter 

				Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Torque&oldid=534430470"				
 /printfooter 
 catlinks 
Categories: Concepts in physicsEngine technologyPhysical quantitiesRotationForceTorque  /catlinks 

 debughtml 
 /debughtml 

 /bodyContent 

 